PRESIDENT’S SECRETARIAT 
(LIBRARY) 


Accn. No Class No 

The book should be returned on or before the date 
last stamped below< 



THE MODERN LIBRARY 
of the World’s Best Bool{s 

►»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»>»»»»»»»»»»»5 


THE WEALTH 

OF 


NATIONS 



»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»» 


T he publishers will be pleased to send, upon 
request, an tllustrated folder setting forth 
the purpose and scope of the modern 
LIBRARY, and listing each volume in the 
series. Every reader of boo\s will find 
titles he has been looking for, handsomely 
printed, in unabridged editions, and 
at an unusually low price. 


»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»» 



AN INQUIRY INTO 
THE NATURE AND CAUSES OF 

THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


»»»»»»>»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»» 


BY 

ADAM SMITH * 

EDITED, WITH AN INTRODUCTION, NOTES, MARGINAL 
SUMMARY AND AN ENLARGED INDEX BY 

EDWIN CANNAN, M.A., LLD. 

PROFESSOR OF POLITIC M FCO^OMY IN THF UNIVERSITY OP LONDON 


WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY 

MAX lERNFR 
EDITOR or “the n \tion” 





»>»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»» 


THE MODERN LIBRARY 

NEW YORK 



INTRODUCTION COPYRIGHT, 1 9 37, BY RANDOM HOUSE, INC. 

»>»»»»»»»>»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»»» 



THE MODERN LIBRARY 

IS PUBLISHED BY 

RANDOM HOUSE, INC. 

BENNETT A. CERF • DONALD S. KLOPFER • ROBERT K. HAAS 


(fJtianufactured in the United States of America 
"Printed by Parkway Printing Company Paper by Richard Bauer B Co, 
Bound by H, W'olff 



INTRODUCTION 
By Max Lerner 

Like all great books, The Wealth of Nations is the outpouring not 
only of a great mind, but of a whole epoch. The man who wrote it 
had learning, wisdom, a talent for words; but equally important 
was the fact that he stood with these gifts at the dawn of a new 
science and the opening of a new era in Europe. What he wrote was 
the expression of forces which were working, at the very time he 
wrote it, to fashion that strange and terrible new species — homo 
oeconomicus, or the economic man of the modern world. I use that 
term not in the sense of the lifeless abstraction which economic 
theorists have invented to slay any proposals for social change, 
and which has in turn slain them. I use it rather for the very living 
and human businessman, in defense of whom the economists have 
written and in whose interests they have invented their lifeless ab- 
straction. All the forces which were at work in Europe creating the 
business man, and the society he was to dominate, were at work 
also creating the framework of ideas and institutions within which 
Adam Smith wrote his book. And that book, as though conscious 
that one good turn deserved another, became in its own way a 
powerful influence to further the work of those forces. Thus it is in 
history. A new society, emerging from the shell of the old, creates 
a framework within which a great thinker or artist is enabled to do 
his work; and that work, in turn, serves to smash finally the shell 
of the old society, and to complete and make firmer the outlines of 
the new. Thus it has been with Machiavelli’s Prince, with Adam 
Smith’s The Wealth of Nations, with Karl Marx’s Capital. 

That is why the arguments of all the scholars who have been 
thrashing about, seeking to determine how original Adam Smith 
was, are essentially futile. No first-rate mind whose ideas sum up 
an age and influence masses and movements to come is in any 
purist sense original. The Wealth of Nations is undoubtedly the 
foundation-work of modern economic thought. Yet you can pick it 
to pieces, and find that there is nothing in it that might not have 
been found somewhere in the literature before, and nothing that 
comes out of it that has not to a great degree been punctured by 
the literature that followed. What counts is, of course, not whether 
particular doctrines were once shiny new, or have since stood the 
ravages of time. What counts is the work as a whole — its scope, 
conception and execution, the spirit that animates it and the place 
it has had in history. 


V 



vi 


INTRODUCTION 


Here, then, is the thing itself: a strange mixture of a book— eco- 
nomics, philosophy, history, political theory, practical program; a 
book written by a man of vast learning and subtle insights — a man 
with a mind that was a powerful analytic machine for sifting out 
the stuff in his notebooks, and a powerful synthetic machine for 
putting it together again in new and arresting combinations. Smith 
was sensitive to the various elements on the intellectual horizon of 
his day. Like Marx after him, he was no closet scholar, shut off 
from the world; he was all antennae, reaching out for and absorb- 
ing everything within reach. He wrote at the end of the break-up of 
feudal Europe, at the beginning of a modern world in which the old 
feudal institutions were still holding on with the tenacity that 
the vested interests have always shown. It was against these vested 
interests that he wrote. And the result is that his book has not been 
merely for library shelves. It has gone through many editions, and 
has been translated into almost every language. Those who read it 
were chiefly those who stood to profit from its view of the world — 
the rising class of businessmen, their political executive committees 
in the parliaments of the world, and their intellectual executive 
conunittees in the academies. Through them it has had an enormous 
influence upon the underlying populations of the world, although 
generally all unknown to them. And through them also it has had 
an enormous influence upon economic opinion and national policy. 
It has done as much perhaps as any modern book thus far to shape 
the whole landscape of life as we live it today. 

Who was the man who could do all this? At first glance Adam 
Smith appears only as a mild, Scottish professor of moral philos- 
ophy, retiring and absent-minded, a gentle sage with dynamite flow- 
ing from his pen. His career had nothing extraordinary in it, except 
that at three he was carried off by a band of gypsies, and only with 
difficulty restored to his family. But whatever other adventure the 
rest of his life held for him was to lie in the dangerous voyage of 
the mind rather than in the glories or disasters of an adventurous 
outward career. He had the traditional Scottish boyhood in a frugal 
family; spent the traditional years at Oxford — ^years which served 
as the basis for the caustic attack on universities which is to be 
found in these pages; cooled his heels for the traditional period 
while he waited for a suitable university appointment; was made 
professor of logic and then professor of moral philosophy at Glas- 
gow, giving lectures on theology, ethics, jurisprudence and po- 
litical economy to students who probably cared more about their 
careers in the rising merchant class than they did about moral phi- 
losophy; wrote a book called The Theory of Moral Sentiments^ 
which made something of a splash at the time, and since it ex- 



INTRODUCTION vii 

plained the social psychology of human behavior in terms of the 
sentiment of sympathy, got itself much talked about and read in 
polite circles throughout the British Isles; gave up his university 
post to go as traveling tutor to the stepson of the famous colonial- 
baiter, Charles Townshend — the young Duke of Buccleugh, and 
spent a year and a half at Toulouse and a year at Paris with him; 
began, while on the trip, a treatise on economics, completing it ten 
years after his return to Scotland; finally published his treatise in 
1776 under the title of The Wealth of Nations; and spent the rest 
of his life as commissioner of customs at Edinburgh, living quietly 
with his mother and a maiden cousin. 

That is one version of Adam Smith, and it is true enough — for 
a half-truth. But there is another half-truth needed to complete the 
picture. Adam Smith was always alive to what was going on in the 
world. He was heterodox enough to remember with passion the futil- 
ity of the ordinary university teaching, as he had experienced it at 
Oxford. In his own teaching, while he had no eloquence, he could 
communicate to his students his own fervor for ideas. Of his lectures 
on jurisprudence, John Rae, his biographer, tells us that the course 
^‘taught the young people to think. His opinions became the sub- 
jects of general discussion, the branches he lectured upon became 
fashionable in the town . . . stucco busts of him appeared in the book- 
sellers^ windows, and the very peculiarities of his voice and pro- 
nunciation received the homage of imitation.^^ The doctrine that 
he was teaching was, it must be remembered, new doctrine — that of 
economic liberalism and freedom from governmental interference. 
To it were attached therefore at once the obstacles and advantages 
of new doctrine; it met with the hostility of the entrenched and the 
salvos of those who stood to gain by innovation. Smith himself was 
by no means a recluse. The tutorship that was offered him was 
lucrative, and yet there was a gamble in leaving his university chair. 
That he did so is evidence of his restless desire to explore the 
bounds of the new European society. He was a friend of Plume, 
and in P'rance he found in addition Quesnay, Turgot, D^Alembert, 
Helvetius — the physiocrats who were fashioning a new and exciting 
economic science, and the philosophes who were constructing out of 
the materials of the rational life instruments for shattering encum- 
bering and irrational institutions. Smith kept his eyes and ears 
open; he kept his notebooks ready; he kept his wits with him. He 
started to write up his lectures on political economy, as he had 
formerly written up his lectures on moral philosophy. But this was 
a different matter. It wasn't merely the business of going back to 
first principles, and then spinning the rest out of one's philosophic 
entrails. Here was something that gave order and meaning to the 



viii INTRODUCTION 

newly emerged world of commerce and the newly emerging world of 
industry. Here was something that could be used in fighting the 
clumsy and obstructive vestiges of a society governed by a feudal 
aristocracy. Smith trembled with anticipation, and could not help 
communicating his excitement to his friends. They too trembled — 
and waited. Smith took ten more years. He could not be hurried in 
this task. He had to read and observe further. He poked his nose 
into old books and new factories. He got led off on long excursions 
into the history of silver coinage, the economics of ecclesiastical 
institutions, the whole cultural history of Europe. He had to polish 
his style, but, more important, he had to fashion and carry through 
consistently a new way of looking at things — the hard-bitten eco- 
nomic viewpoint. He had, above all else, to avoid making his book 
merely a theoretical construction; it must deal with the burning 
issues of national and international economic policy of his day. 
When the book was finished, therefore, it was more than a book; it 
was the summary of a new European consciousness. 

You will find the basic principles that Smith embodied in his 
book explained in all the histories of economic thought. What you 
will not find is the skill, the charm, the greatness with which he 
wove them into the fabric of his chapters. The principles are simple. 
First, Smith assumes that the prime psychological drive in man as 
an economic being is the drive of self-interest. Secondly, he assumes 
the existence of a natural order in the universe which makes all the 
individual strivings for self-interest add up to the social good. 
Finally, from these postulates, he concludes that the best program 
is to leave the economic process severely alone — ^what has come to be 
known as laissez-faire, economic liberalism, or non-interventionism. 

All this is now familiar enough. Largely through Smith’s book it 
has made itself a part of the structure of our often unconscious be- 
liefs, and is only now beginning to be dislodged. Of Smith’s first 
postulate it must be said that while it is largely an abstraction from 
experience, as the institutional school of economists have delighted 
to point out, the experience from which it is abstracted does much 
to verify it. The view which makes of man an economic automaton 
is obviously oversimplified. But the view which makes out of him a 
hard-headed and predatory seeker of his own gain is, as we look 
back at the history of business enterprise, largely justified. What 
we have learned, of course, is that it is not an inherent or universal 
trait, but part oit an historical method of organizing economic life. 
As for Smith’s second postulate — that there is a ^^natural order,’' 
whereby the pursuit by each individual of his own self-interest con- 
tributes ultimately to the social welfare, that must lie outside the 
realm of science or of historical verification, and must be set down 



INTRODUCTION ix 

as a cardinal principle of the faith of the age. As Carl Becker has 
pointed out, the ‘^natural order’’ which the eighteenth-century phi- 
losophers postulated in order the better to fight the ecclesiastical 
institutions and the political obscurantism of their day became 
itself a source of a quasi-theological faith and of obscurantism. 

The conclusion that Smith drew from these postulates was simple 
enough. Since a natural order exists whereby the enlightened selfish- 
ness of all men adds up to the maximum good of society* since there 
is a ‘‘divine hand” which guides each man in pursuing his own gain 
to contribute to the social welfare, it must follow that government 
is superfluous except to preserve order and perform routine func- 
tions. The best government is the government that governs least. 
The best economic policy is that which arises from the spontaneous 
and unhindered action of individuals. We recognize this, of course, 
as the unregulated and individualistic capitalist economy — ^what 
Carlyle has unforgettably termed “anarchy plus a constable.” 

One warning is necessary. We must not conclude, because 
Smith’s intellectual system can be presented in an orderly sequence 
from postulates to conclusion, that he arrived at it by the samfe 
sequence. It is much more likely, as with almost all intellectual con- 
structions, that instead of Smith’s program flowing from his prin- 
ciples, it was his principles that flowed from his program. He did not 
start with truths about human behavior and the natural order, and 
arrive at economic liberalism. John Maurice Clark suggests that his 
system can be best understood in terms of what he was reacting 
against. And it is true that Smith’s system of thought took its shape 
from his intense reaction against the elaborate apparatus of controls 
which the surviving feudal and mercantilist institutions were still 
imposing on the individual. The need for removing these controls 
was Smith’s un4€rlying theme. And it was the response which this 
theme met from the mercantile and industrial class of Europe that 
gave The Wealth of Nation^ its enormous impact upon Western 
thougjit and Western institutions. Harold Laski has demonstrated, 
in his Rise of Liberalism, how Smith’s arguments fitted in with the 
prevailing middle-class temper in Europe. The businessmen Were 
delighted. “To have their own longings elevated to the dignity of 
natural law was to provide them with a driving force that had never 
before beeniso powerful. . . . With Adam Smith the practical maxims 
of business enterprise achieved the status of a theology.” 

But there is another side of the shield. Smith was, to be sure, 
an unconscious f mercenary in the service of a rising capitalist class 
in Europe. It is true that he gave a new dignity to greed and a new 
sanctification to the:predatory impulses. It is true that he ration^- 
ized the economic interests of the class that was coming to power in 



X INTRODUCTION 

such a way that he fashioned for that class a panoply of ideas be- 
hind which they are still protecting themselves against the assaults 
of government regulation and the stirrings for socialization. It is 
true that Smith’s economic individualism is now being used to op- 
press where once it was used to liberate, and that it now entrenches 
the old where once it blasted a path for the new. But it must be said 
for Smith that his doctrine has been twisted in ways he would not 
have approved, and used for purposes and causes at which he would 
have been horrified. 

Adam Smith was, in his own day and his own way, something of 
a revolutionary. His doctrine revolutionized European society as 
surely as Marx’s in a later epoch. He was, on the economic side, the 
philosopher of the capitalist revolution, as John Locke was its phi- 
losopher on the political side. His own personal sympathies were not 
entirely with the capitalist. Eli Ginzberg has pointed out, in his 
House of Adam Smithy how there runs through The Wealth of Na^ 
tions a strain of partisanship for apprentices and laborers, for 
farmers, for the lowly and oppressed everywhere, and a hostility to 
the business corporations, the big-businessmen of the day, the ec- 
clesiasts and the aristocrats. Read the book with an eye for these 
passages, and it becomes a revealing document showing Smith’s 
concern for the common man. Far more important, of course, than 
any of these more or less sentimental expressions of sympathy, is 
the doctrine of labor value which is at the core of Smith’s eco- 
nomics. In enunciating for the first time the doctrine that labor is 
the sole source of value in commodities. Smith became the fore- 
runner of Bray and Hodgskin and eventually of Marx. As an origi- 
nator, Smith developed this doctrine clumsily. It remained for Marx 
to refine it, convert it into an instrument of analysis, extract from 
it the revolutionary implications that were inherent in it from the 
start. This leads us, however, much too far afield. On Smith’s relation 
to the labor theory of value there is a large and polemical literature. 
On the validity or confusion of the theory itself there is a literature 
even larger and more polemical. 

All that concerns us is to see the curious paradox of Smith’s posi- 
tion in history; to have fashioned his system of thought in order to 
blast away the institutional obstructions from the past, and bring a 
greater degree of economic freedom and therefore a greater total 
wealth for all the people in a nation; and yet to have had his doc- 
trine result in the glorification of economic irresponsibility and the 
entrenchment of the middle class in power. A reading of Adam 
Smith’s work and a study of its place in the history of ideas should 
be one of the best solvents for smugness and intellectual absolutism. 



m 


CONTENTS 

PACE 

iNTRODtfCTION TO THE MODEEN LiBRAKY EDITION BY MAX 


LERNER V 

Preface xk 

Editor’s Introduction vm'n 

Introduction and Plan of the Work Ivii 


BOOK I 

Of the Causes of Improvement in the productive Powers of 
Labour, and of the Order according to which its Produce 
is naturally distributed among the different Ranks of the 
People 3 

CHAPTER I 

Of the Division of Labour 3 

CHAPTER n 

Of the Principle which gives Occasion to the Division of Labour 13 

CHAPTER III 

Thai the Division of Labour is limted by the Extent of the Market 17 

CHAPTER IV 

0 / the Origin and Use of Money 22 

CHAPTER V 

Of the real and nominal Price of Commodities, or of their Price 
in Labour, and their Price in Money 

jd 


3 ® 



xii 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

CHAPTER VI 

Of the component Parts of the Price of Commodities 47 

CHAPTER VII 

Of the natural and market Price of Commodities 55 

CHAPTER VIII 

Of the Wages of Labour 64 

CHAPTER IX 

Of the Profits of Stock 87 

CHAPTER X 

Of Wages and Profit in the different Employments of Labour and 
Stock 

Part I. Inequalities arising from the Nature of the Employ- 
ments themselves 100 

Part II. Inequalities occasioned by the Policy of Europe 118 

CHAPTER XI 

Of the Rent of Land 144 

Part I. Of the Produce of Land which always affords Rent 146 
Part II. 0 / the Produce of Land which sometimes does, and 

sometimes does not, afford Rent 161 

Part III. Of the Variations in the Proportion between the re- 
spective Values of that Sort of Produce which always affords 
Rent, and of that which sometimes does and sometimes does 
not afford Rent 

Digression concerning the Variations in the Value of Silver 
during^ the Course of the Four last Centuries. 

First Period 1^5 

Second Period X91 

Third Period 1^2 

Variations in the Proportion between the respective Values of 
Gold and Silver 21 1 

Grounds of the Suspicion that the Value of Silver still continues 

to decrease 216 

Different Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon the real 

price of three different Sorts of rude Produce 217 



CONTENTS xiii 

PAGE 

First Sort 218 

Second Sort 219 

Third Sort 228 

Conclusion of the Digression concerning the Variations in the 

Value of Silver 237 

Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon the real Price of 

Manufactures 242 

Conclusion of the Chapter 247 

BOOK II 

Of the Nature, Accumulation, and Employment of Stock 
Introdtjction 259 

CHAPTER I 

Of the Division of Stock 262 

CHAPTER II 

Of Money considered as a particular Branch of the general Stock 
of the Society, or of the Expence of maintaining the National 
Capital 270 

CHAPTER III 

Of the Accumulation of Capital, or of productive and unpro^ 

ductive Labour 314 

CHAPTER IV 

Of Stock lent at Interest 333 


CHAPTER V 

Of the different Employment of Capitals 


341 



CONTENTS 

PAGE 

BOOK III 

Of the dijfferent Progress of Opulence in different Nations 
CHAPTER I 

Of the Natural Progress of Opulence 356 

CHAPTER n 

Of the Discouragement of Agriculture in the ancient State of 
Europe after the Fall of the Roman Empire 361 


CHAPTER III 

Of the Rise and Progress of Cities and Towns, after the Fall of the 

Roman Empire 373 


CHAPTER IV 

How the Commerce of the Towns contributed to the Improvement 

of the Country 384 


BOOK IV 


Of Systems of political (Economy 

Introduction 


397 


CHAPTER I 

Of the Principle of the commercial, or mercantile System 398 

CHAPTER II 

Of Restraints upon the Importation from foreign Countries of 
such Goods as can be produced at Home 


420 



dONTEKTS 


XV 


PAGE 

CHAPTER III 

OJ ihe extraordinary Restraints upon the Importation of Goods of 
almost all Kinds, from those Countries with which the 


Balance is supposed to be disadvantageous 440 

Part I. Of the U nreasonableness of those Restraints even upon 

the Principles of the Commercial System 440 

Digression, concerning Banks of Deposit, particularly concerning 

that of Amsterdam 446 

Part II. Of the Unreasonableness of those extraordinary 

Restraints upon other Principles 455 

CHAPTER IV 

Of Drawbacks 466 

CHAPTER V 

Of Bounties 472 

Digression concerning the Corn Trade and Corn Lrms 490 

CHAPTER VI 

Of Treaties of Commerce 51 1 

CHAPTER VII 

Of Colonies 523 

Part I. Of the Motives for establishing new Colonies 523 

Part II. Causes of the Prosperity of New Colonies 531 

Part III. Of the Advantages which Europe has derived from 
the Discovery of America, and from that of a Passage to the 
East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope 557 

CHAPTER VIII 

Conclusion of the Mercantile System 607 


CHAPTER rX 

Of the Agricultural Systems, or of those Systems of Political 
(Economy, which represent the Produce of Land, as either 
the sole or the principal Source of the Revenue and Wealth 
of every Country 627 



xvi 


CONTENTS 


FAG£ 

BOOK V 

Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth 
CHAPTER I 

Of the Expences of the Sovereign or Commonwealth 653 

Part I. Of the Expence of Defence 653 

Part II. Of the Expence of Justice 669 

Part III. Of the Expence of Public Works and Public 
Institutions 681 

Article ist. Of the Public Works and Institutions for facili- 
tating the Commerce of Society, 

ist, For facilitating the general Commerce of the 

Society 682 

2dly, For facilitating particular Branches of Com- 
merce 690 

Article 2d. Of the Expence of the Institutions for the Edu>ca- 

tion of Youth 716 

Article 3d. Of the Expence of the Institutions for the Instruc- 
tion of People of all Ages 740 

Part IV. Of the Expence of supporting the Dignity of the 

Sovereign ^ 766 

Conclusion of the Chapter 767 

CHAPTER II 

I 

Of the Sources of the general or public Revenue of the Society 769 
Part I. Of the Funds or Sources of Reverme which may pecu- 
liarly belong to the Sovereign or Commonwealth 769 

Part II. Of Taxes 777 

Article ist. Taxes upon Rent; Taxes upon the Rent of Land 779 
Taxes which are proportioned^ not to the Rent, but to the Produce 

of Land ygg 

Taxes upon the Rent of Houses jgi 

Article 2d. Taxes upon Profit, or upon the Revenue arising 
from Stock 7^8 

Taxes upon the Profit of particular Employments 803 

Appendix to Articles ist and 2d. Taxes upon the Capi- 
tal Value of Lands, Houses, and Stock 809 

Article 3d. Taxes upon the Wages of Labour 815 

Article 4th. Taxes which, it is intended, should fall indiffer- 
ently upon every different Species of Revenue 818 

Capitation Taxes 819 

Taxes upon consumable Commodities 821 



CONTENTS 

XVI 1 


PAGE 

CHAPTER III 


Of public Debts 

859 

Appendix on the Herring Bounty 

901 

Index I. Subjects 

907 

Index II. Authorities 

971 


[From “Introduction and Plan of the Work” to “Public Debts,” the Con- 
tents are printed in the present edition as they appeared in eds. 3-5 Eds. i 
and 2 neither enumerate the chapter “Conclusion of the Mercantile Sys- 
tem,” nor divide Bk. V , ch 1 , Pt. iii , Art ist into sections, since the chap- 
ter and one of the two sections appeared first in ed 3. Eds i and 2 also 
lead “Inequalities in Wages and Profits arising from the Nature of the dif- 
lerent Employments of both” at Bk. I , ch. x., Pt. i ] 




PREFACE 


The text of the present edition is copied from that of the fifth, the 
last published before Adam Smith’s death. The fifth edition has 
been carefully collated with the first, and wherever the two were 
found to disagree the history of the alteration has been traced 
through the intermediate editions. With some half-dozen utterly 
insignificant exceptions such as a change of “these” to “those,” 
“towards’’ to “toward,” and several haphazard substitutions ol 
“conveniences” for “conveniencies,” the results of this collation are 
all recorded in the footnotes, unless the difference between the edi- 
tions is quite obviously and undoubtedly the consequence of mere 
misprints, such as “is” for “it,” “that” for “than,” “becase” for 
‘^because,” Even undoubted misprints are recorded if, as often 
happens, they make a plausible misreading which has been copied 
in modern texts, or if they present any other feature of interest. 

As it does not seem desirable to dress up an eighteenth century 
classic entirely in twentieth century costume, I have retained the 
spelling of the fifth edition and steadily refused to attempt to make 
it consistent with itself. The danger which would be incurred by 
doing so may be shown by the example of “CromweL” Few mod- 
ern readers would hesitate to condemn this as a misprint, but it is, 
as a matter of fact, the spelling affected by Hume in his History ^ 
and was doubtless adopted from him by Adam Smith, though in the 
second of the two places where the name is mentioned inadvertence 
or the obstinacy of the printers allowed the usual “Cromwell” to 
appear till the fourth edition was reached. I have been equally rig- 
id in following the original in the matter of the use of capitals and 
italics, except that in deference to modern fashion I have allowed 
the initial words of paragraphs to appear in small letters instead of 
capitals, the chapter headings to be printed in capitals instead of 
italics, and the abbreviation “Chap.” to be replaced by “Chapter” 
in full. I have also allowed each chapter to begin on a fresh page, 
as the old practice of beginning a new chapter below the end of the 
preceding one is inconvenient to a student who desires to use the 
book for reference. 



XX 


PREFACE 

In writing a marginal summary for the text I have felt like an 
architect commissioned to place a new building alongside some an- 
cient masterpiece: I have endeavoured to avoid on the one hand an 
impertinent adoption of Smith’s words and style, and on the other 
an obtrusively modern phraseology which might contrast unpleas- 
antly with the text. 

The original index, with some slight unavoidable changes of ty- 
pography, is reprinted as it appeared in the third, fourth and fifth 
editions. I have added to it a large number of new articles and ref- 
erences. I have endeavoured by these additions to make it absolute- 
ly complete in regard to names of places and persons, except that 
it seemed useless to include the names of kings and others when 
used merely to indicate dates, and altogether vain to hope to deal 
comprehensively with “Asia,” “England,” “Great Britain” and 
“Europe.” I have inserted a few catchwords which may aid in the 
recovery of particularly striking passages, such as “Invisible 
hand,” “Pots and pans,” “Retaliation,” “Shopkeepers, nation of.” 
I have not thought it desirable to add to the more general of the 
headings in the original index, such as “Commerce” and “Labour,” 
since these might easily be enlarged till they included nearly every- 
thing in the book. Authorities expressly referred to either in the 
text or the Author’s notes are included, but as it would have been 
inconvenient and confusing to add references to the Editor’s notes, 
I have appended a second index in which all the authorities re- 
ferred to in the text, in the Author’s notes, and in the Editor’s notes 
are collected together. This will, I hope, be found useful by stu- 
dents of the history of economics. 

The Author’s references to his footnotes are placed exactly where 
he placed them, though their situation is often somewhat curiously 
selected, and the footnotes themselves are printed exactly as in the 
fifth edition. Critics will probably complain of the trivial character 
of many of the notes which record the result of the collation of the 
editions, but I would point out that if I had not recorded all the 
differences, readers would have had to rely entirely on my expres- 
sion of opinion that the unrecorded differences were of no interest. 
The evidence having been once collected at the expense of very 
considerable labour, it was surely better to put it on record, espe- 
cially as these trivial notes, though numerous, if collected together 
would not occupy more than three or four pages of the present 
work. Moreover, as is shown in the Editor’s Introduction, the most 
trivial of the differences often throw interesting light upon Smith’s 
way of regarding and treating his work. 

The other notes consist chiefly of references to sources of Adam 



XXI 


PREFACE 

Smith’s information. Where he quotes his authority by name, no 
difficulty ordinarily arises. Elsewhere there is often little doubt 
about the matter. The search for authorities has been greatly fa- 
cilitated by the publication of Dr. Bonar’s Catalogue of the Li- 
brary of Adam Smith in 1894, and of Adam Smith’s Lectures in 
1896. The Catalogue tells us what books Smith had in his posses- 
sion at his death, fourteen years after the Wealth of Nations was 
published, while the Lectures often enable us to say that a par- 
ticular piece of information must have been taken from a book 
published before 1763. As it is known that Smith used the Advo- 
cates’ Library, the Catalogue of that library, of which Part II was 
printed in 1776, has also been of some use. Of course a careful com- 
parison of words and phrases often makes it certain that a particu- 
lar statement must have come from a particular source. Neverthe- 
less many of the references given must be regarded as indicating 
merely a possible source of information or inspiration. I have re- 
frained from quoting or referring to parallel passages in other auth- 
ors when it is impossible or improbable that Smith ever saw them. 
That many more references might be given by an editor gifted with 
omniscience I know better than any one. To discover a reference 
has often taken hours of labour: to fail to discover one has often 
taken days. 

When Adam Smith misquotes or clearly misinterprets his au- 
thority, I note the fact, but I do not ordinarily profess to decide 
whether his authority is right or wrong. It is neither possible nor 
desirable to rewrite the history of nearly all economic institutions 
and a great many other institutions in the form of footnotes to the 
Wealth of Nations, 

Nor have I thought well to criticise Adam Smith’s theories in the 
light of modern discussions. I would beseech any one who thinks 
that this ought to have been done to consider seriously what it 
would mean. Let him review the numerous portly volumes which 
modern inquiry has produced upon every one of the immense num- 
ber of subjects treated by Adam Smith, and ask himself whether 
he really thinks the order of subjects in the Wealth of Nations a 
convenient one to adopt in an economic encyclopaedia. The book is 
surely a classic of great historical interest which should not be over- 
laid by the opinions and criticisms of any subsequent moment — 
still less of any particular editor. 

Much of the heavier work involved in preparing the present edi- 
tion, especially the collation of the original editions, has been done 
by my friend Mrs. Norman Moor, without whose untiring assis- 
tance the book could not have been produced. 



xxii PREFACE 

Numerous friends have given me the benefit of their knowledge 
of particular points, and mv hearty thanks are due to them. 

E.C. 

London School of Economics, 1904 


9 



EDITOR^S INTRODUCTION 


The first edition of the Wealth of Nations was published on the 9th 
of March, ^ 1776, in two volumes quarto, of which the first, con- 
taining Books I., II. and III., has 510 pages of text, and the second, 
containing Books IV. and V., has 587. The title-page describes the 
author as “Adam Smith, LL.D. and F.R.S. Formerly Professor of 
Moral Philosophy in the University of Glasgow.’’ There is no pref- 
ace or index. The whole of the Contents are printed at the begin- 
ning of the first volume. The price was £i ids.^ 

The second edition appeared early in 1778, priced at £2 2s.,® but 
differing little in appearance from its predecessor. Its pages very 
nearly correspond, and the only very obvious difference is that the 
Contents are now divided between the two volumes. There are, 
however, a vast number of small differences between the first and 
second editions. One of the least of these, the alteration of “late” to 
“present,” ^ draws our attention to the curious fact that writing at 
some time before the spring of 1776 Adam Smith thought it safe to 
refer to the American troubles as “the late disturbances.” ® We can- 
not tell whether he thought the disturbances were actually*over, or 
only that he might safely assume they would be over before the 
book was published. As “present disturbances” also occurs close to 
“late disturbances,” ® we may perhaps conjecture that when correct- 
ing his proofs in the winter of 1775-6, he had altered his opinion 
and only allowed “late” to stand by an oversight. A very large pro- 
portion of the alterations are merely verbal, and made for the sake 
of greater elegance or propriety of diction, such as the frequent 
change from “tear and wear” (which occurs also in Lectures, p. 208) 
to the more ordinary “wear and tear.” Most of the footnotes appear 
first in the second edition. A few corrections as to matters of fact 
are made, such as that in relation to the percentage of the tax on 
silver in Spanish America (p. 169). Figures are corrected on p. 328, 
and pp. 838, 842. New information is added here and there: an ad- 

^ John Rae, Lije of Adam Smith, 1895, p. 284. 

^ Ibid., p. 285. 

^Ibid., p. 324. 

'‘•Below, pp. 465, 890. 

" See p. 544, as well as the passages referred to in the previous note. 

"Pp. S4I, 552, 581. 



xxiv editor's introduction 

ik 

ditional way of raising money by fictitious bills is described in the 
long note on p. 295; the details from Sandi as to the introduction 
of the silk manufacture into Venice are added (p. 381) ; so also are 
the accounts of the tax on servants in Holland (p. 809), and the 
mention of an often forgotten but important quality of the land- 
tax, the possibility of reassessment within the parish (p. 796). 
There are some interesting alterations in the theory as to the emer- 
gence of profit and rent from primitive conditions, though Smith 
himself would probably be surprised at the importance which some 
modern inquirers attach to the points in question (pp. 47-So)* On 
pp. 97, 98, the fallacious argument to prove that high profits raise 
prices more than high wages is entirely new, though the doctrine 
itself is asserted in another passage (p. 565). The insertion in the 
second edition of certain cross-references on pp. 193, 312, which do 
not occur in the first edition, perhaps indicates that the Digressions 
on the Corn Laws and the Bank of Amsterdam were somewhat late 
additions to the scheme of the work. Beer is a necessary of life in 
one place and a luxury in another in the first edition, but is no- 
where a necessary in the second (pp. 432, 822). The epigrammatic 
condemnation of the East India Company on pp. 602-3, a-ppears 
first in the second edition. On p. 751, we find “Christian” substi- 
tuted for “Roman Catholic,” and the English puritans, who were 
“persecuted” in the first edition, are only “restrained” in the 
second (p. 555) — defections from the ultra-protestant standpoint 
perhaps due to the posthumous working of the influence of Hume 
upon his friend. 

Between the second edition and the third, published at the end 
of 1784,'^ there are considerable differences. The third edition is in 
three volumes, octavo, the first running to the end of Book II., 
chapter ii., and the second from that point to the end of the chapter 
on Colonies, Book IV., chapter viii. The author by this time had 
overcome the reluctance he felt in 1778 to have his office in the 
customs added to his other distinctions® and consequently appears 
on the title-page as “Adam Smith, LL.D. and F.R.S. of London and 
Edinburgh: one of the commissioners of his Majesty’s Customs in 
Scotland; and formerly professor of Moral Philosophy in the Uni- 
versity of Glasgow.” The imprint is “London: printed for A. Stra- 
han; and T. Cadell, in the Strand.” This edition was sold at one 
guinea.® Prefixed to it is the following “Advertisement to the Third 
Edition”: — 

^ Rae, Life of Adam Smith, p. 362. 
p. 323. 

^ Ibid., p. 362. 



editor’s introduction XXV 

“The first Edition of the following Work was printed in the end of 
the year 1775, and in the beginning of the year 1776. Through the 
greater part of the Book, therefore, whenever the present state of 
things is mentioned, it is to be understood of the state they were in, 
either about that time, or at some earlier period, during the time I 
was employed in writing the Book. To this"® third Edition, however, 
I have made several additions, particularly to the chapter upon Draw- 
backs, and to that upon Bounties; likewise a new chapter entitled, 
The Conclusion of the Mercantile System; and a new article to the 
chapter upon the expences of the sovereign. In all these additions, 
the present state of things means always the state in which they were 
during the year 1783 and the beginning of the present"" year 1784.” 

Comparing the second and the third editions we find that the 
additions to the third are considerable. As the Preface or ^‘Adver- 
tisement” just quoted remarks, the chapter entitled “Conclusion of 
the Mercantile System” (pp. 607-26) is entirely new, and so is the 
section “Of the Public Works and Institutions which are necessary 
for facilitating particular Branches of Commerce” (pp. 690-716). 
Certain passages in Book IV., chapter iii., on the absurdity of the 
restrictions on trade with France (pp. 440-1 and 462-3), the three 
pages near the beginning of Book IV., chapter iv., upon the details 
of various drawbacks (pp. 466-70), the ten paragraphs on the 
herring fishery bounty (pp. 485-9) with the appendix on the same 
subject (pp. 901-3), and a portion of the discussion of the effects 
on the corn bounty (pp. 475-6) also appear first in the third edi- 
tion. With several other additions and corrections of smaller size 
these passages were printed separately in quarto under the title of 
“Additions and Corrections to the First and Second Editions of Dr. 
Adami Smith's Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth 
of Nations.” Writing to Cadell in December, 1782, Smith 
says: — 

“I hope in two or three months to send you up the second edition 
corrected in many places, with three or four very considerable addi- 
tions, chiefly to the second volume. Among the rest is a short but, 1 
flatter myself, a complete history of all the trading companies in Great 
Britain. These additions I mean not only to be inserted at their proper 
places into the new edition, but to be printed separately and to be sold 
for a shilling or half a crown to the purchasers of the old edition 

Edition 4 alters “this” to “the.” 

Edition 4 omits “present.” 

^They are frequently found at the end of existing bound copies of the 
second edition. The statement in Rae, Life of Adam Smith, p 362, that they 
were published in 1783 is a mistake; cp. the “Advertisement to the Third 
Edition” above. 



xxvi editor’s introduction 

The price must depend on the bulk of the additions when they are all 
written out.’’^® 

Besides the separately printed additions there are many minor 
alterations between the second and third editions, such as the com- 
placent note on the adoption of the house tax (p. 795), the correc- 
tion of the estimate of possible receipts from the turnpikes (p. 685, 
note 37), and the reference to the expense of the American war (p. 
876), but none of these is of much consequence. More important is 
the addition of the lengthy index surmounted by the rather quaint 
superscription The Roman numerals refer to the Volume, 

and the figures to the Page.” We should not expect a man of 
Adam Smith’s character to make his own index, and we may be 
quite certain that he did not do so when we find the misprint 
^Tallie” on p. 787, reappearing in the index (5,^;. Montauban) 
though 'Taille” has also a place there. But the index is far from 
suggesting the work of an unintelligent hack, and the fact that the 
^^Ayr bank” is named in it ($,v. Banks), though nameless in the 
text, shows either that the index-maker had a certain knowledge of 
Scotch banking history or that Smith corrected his work in places. 
That Smith received a packet from Strahan '^containing some part 
of the index” on 17th November, 1784, we know from his letter to 
Cadell, published in the Economic Journal for September, 1898. 
Strahan had inquired whether the index was to be printed in quarto 
along with the Additions and Coirections, and Smith reminded him 
that the numbers of the pages would all have to be altered "to 
accommodate them to either of the two former editions, of which 
the pages do not in many places correspond.” There is therefore no 
reason for not treating the index as an integral part of the book. 

The fourth edition, published in 1786, is printed in the same 
style and with exactly the same pagination as the third. It reprints 
the advertisement to the third edition, altering, however, the phrase 
"this third Edition,” into "the third Edition,” and "the present year 
1784” into "the year 1784,” and adds the following "Advertise- 
ment to the Fourth Edition”; — 

"In this fourth Edition I have made no alterations of any kind. I 
now, however, find myself at liberty to acknowledge my very great 
obligations to Mr. Henry Hop of Amsterdam. To that Gentleman I 

“ Rae, Life of Adam Smith, p. 362. 

Corrected to “Hope^^ in edition 5. The celebrated firm of Hope, mer- 
chant-bankers in Amsterdam, was founded by a Scotchman in the seven- 
teenth century (see Sir Thomas Hope in the Dictionary of National Biogra- 
phy), Henry Hope was born in Boston, Mass., in 1736, and passed six years 
in a banking house in England before he joined his relatives in Amsterdam. 



editor’s introduction xxvii 

owe the most distinct, as well as liberal information, concerning a very 
interesting and important subject, the Bank of Amsterdam; of which 
no printed account had ever appeared to me satisfactory, or even in- 
telligible. The name of that Gentleman is so well known in Europe, 
the information which comes from him must do so much honour to 
whoever has been favoured with it, and my vanity is so much inter- 
ested in making this acknowledgment, that I can no longer refuse my- 
self the pleasure of prefixing this Advertisement to this new Edition 
of my Book.” 

In spite of his statement that he had made no alterations of any 
kind, Smith either made or permitted a few trifling alterations be- 
tween the third and fourth editions. The subjunctive is very fre- 
quently substituted for the indicative after “if,” the phrase “if it 
was” in particular being constantly altered to “if it were.” On p. 
70, note 23, “late disturbances” is substituted for “present disturb- 
ances.” The other differences are so trifling that they may be mis- 
readings or unauthorised corrections of the printers. 

The fifth edition, the last published in Smithes lifetime and con- 
sequently the one from which the present edition has been copied, 
is dated 1789. It is almost identical with the fourth, the only dif- 
ference being that the misprints of the fourth edition are corrected 
in the fifth and a considerable number of fresh ones introduced, 
while several false concords — or concords regarded as false — are 
corrected (see pp. 106, 682, 716).^*'^ 

It is clear from the passage on p. 643, that Smith regarded the 
title “An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations” as a synonym for “political ceconomy,” and it seems per- 
haps a little surprising that he did not call his book *^Political 

He became a partner with them, and on the death of Adrian Hope the 
conduct of the whole of the business of the firm devolved upon him. When 
the French invaded Holland in 1794 he retired to England. He died on 25th 
February, 1811, leaving £1,160,000 {Gentleman^ s Magazine, March, 1811). 

^®Most modern editions are copied from the fourth edition. Thorold 
Rogers’ edition, however, though said in the preface to be copied from the 
fourth, as a matter of fact follows the third. In one instance, indeed, the 
omission of “so” before “as long as” on p. 41, line 32 (in the present 
edition) , Rogers’ text agrees with that of the fourth edition rather than the 
third, but this is an accidental coincidence in error ; the error is a particular- 
ly easy one to make and it is actually corrected in the^ errata to the fourth 
edition, so that it is not really the reading of that edition. The fifth edition 
must not be confused with a spurious “fifth edition with additions” in 2 
vols., 8vo, published in Dublin in 1793 with the “Advertisement” to the 
third edition deliberately falsified by the substitution of “fifth” for “third” 
in the sentence “To this third edition however I have made several addi- 
tions.” It is perhaps the existence of this spurious “fifth edition” which 
has led several writers (e.g., Rae, Life of Adam Smith, p. 293) to ignore 
the genuine fifth edition. The sixth edition is dated 1791. 



xxviii editor’s INTRODUCTION 

(Economy^ or ^Trinciples of Political (Economy P But we must re- 
member that the term was still in 1776 a very new one, and that 
it had been used in the title of Sir James Steuart's great book, An 
Inquiry into the Principles of Political (Economy: being an Essay 
on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations, which was pub- 
lished in 1767. Nowadays, of course, no author has any special 
claim to exclusive use of the title. We should as spon think of 
claiming copyright for the title ^^Arithmetic’^ or ^'Elements of Geol- 
ogy’’ as for ‘Trinciples of Political Economy.” But in 1776 Adam 
Smith may well have refrained from using it simply because it had 
been used by Steuart nine years before, especially considering the 
fact that the Wealth of Nations was to be brought out by the pub- 
lishers who had brought out Steuart’s book.^® 

From 1759 at the latest an early draft of what subsequently de- 
veloped into the Wealth of Nations existed in the portion of Smith’s 
lectures on ^^Jurisprudence” which he called “Police, Revenue and 
Arms,” the rest of “Jurisprudence” being “Justice” and the “Laws 
of Nations.” Jurisprudence he defined as “that science which in- 
quires into the general principles which ought to be the foundation 
of the laws of all nations,” or as “the theory of the general prin- 
ciples of law and government.” In forecasting his lectures on the 
subject he told his students: — 

“The four great objects of law are justice, police, revenue and arms. 

“The object of justice is the security from injury, and it is the 
foundation of civil government. 

“The objects of police are the cheapness of commodities, public se- 
curity, and cleanliness, if the two last were not too minute for a lec- 
ture of this kind. Under this head we will consider the opulence of a 
state. 

“It is likewise necessary that the magistrate who bestows his time 
and labour in the business of the state should be compensated for it. 
For this purpose and for defraying the expenses of government some 
fund must be raised. Hence the origin of revenue. The subject of con- 
sideration under this head will be the proper means of levying reve- 
nue, which must come from the people by taxes, duties, &c. In gen- 
eral, whatever revenue can be raised most insensibly from the people 
ought to be preferred, and in the sequel it is proposed to be shown 
how far the laws of Britain and other European nations are calculated 
for this purpose. 

“Steuart*s Principles was “printed for A. Millar, and T. Cadell, in the 
Strand.” and the Wealth of Nations “for W. Strahan; and T. Cadell, in the 
Strand.” 

Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms, delivered in the Univer- 
sity of Glasgow by Adam Smith. Reported by a student in 1763, and edited 
with an Introduction and Notes by Edwin Cannan, 1896, pp. i, 3. 



editor’s introduction 

“As the best police cannot give security unless the government can 
defend themselves from foreign injuries and attacks, the fourth thing 
appointed by law is for this purpose; and under this head will be 
shown the different species of arms with their advantages and disad- 
vantages, the constitution of standing armies, militias, &c. 

“After these will be considered the laws of nations . . ” 

The connection of revenue and arms with the general principles 
of law and government is obvious enough, and no question arises 
as to the explanation on these heads given by the forecast. But to 
‘^consider the opulence of a state’’ under the head of “police” seems 
at first sight a little strange. For the explanation we turn to the be- 
ginning of the part of the lectures relating to Police. 

“Police is the second general division of jurisprudence. The name is 
French, and is originally derived from the Greek xoXirem, which 
properly signified the policy of civil government, but now it only 
means the regulation of the inferior parts of government, viz : clean- 
liness, security, and cheapness or plenty.” “ 

That this definition of the French word was correct is well shown 
by the following passage from a book which is known to have been 
in Smith’s possession at his death,-® Bielfeld’s Institutions poli- 
tiques, 1760 (tom. i., p. 99). 

“Le premier President du Harlay en recevant M. d’Argenson a la 
charge de lieutenant general de police de la ville de Paris, lui adressa 
ces paroles, qui meritent d’etre remarquees: Le Roi, Monsieur, vous 
demande sfiret6, nettete, bon-marche. En effet ces trois articles com- 
f)rennent toute la police, qui forme le troisi^me grand objet de la poli- 
tique pour rinterieur de Tfitat.” 

When we find that the chief of the Paris police in 1697 was ex- 
pected to provide cheapness as well as security and cleanliness, we 
wonder less at the inclusion of “cheapness or plenty” or the “opu- 
lence of a state” in “jurisprudence” or “the general principles of 
law and government.” “Cheapness is in fact the same thing with 
plenty” and “the consideration of cheapness or plenty” is “the same 
thing” as “the most proper way of securing wealth and abun- 
dance.” If Adam Smith had been an old-fashioned believer in 
state control of trade and industry he would have described the 

pp. 3, 4. 

'^Lectures, p. 154. 

^ See James Bonar, Catalogue of the Library of Adam Smith, 1894. 

Lectures, p. 157. 



XXX EDITOR^S INTRODUCTION 

most proper regulations for securing wealth and abundance, and 
there would have been nothing strange in this description coming 
under the “general principles of law and government.’’ The actual 
strangeness is simply the result of Smith’s negative attitude — of his 
belief that past and present regulations were for the most part 
purely mischievous. 

The two items, cleanliness and security, he managed to dismiss 
very shortly: “the proper method of carrying dirt from the streets, 
and the execution of justice, so far as it regards regulations for 
preventing crimes or the method of keeping a city guard, though 
useful, are too mean to be considered in a general discourse of this 
kind.” He only offered the observation that the establishment of 
arts and commerce brings about independency and so is the best 
police for preventing crimes. It gives the common people better 
wages, and “in consequence of this a general probity of manners 
takes place through the whole country. Nobody will be so mad 
as to expose himself upon the highway, when he can make better 
bread in an honest and industrious manner.” 

He thei;i came to “cheapness or plenty, or, which is the same 
thing, the most proper way of securing wealth and abundance.” 
He began this part of the subject by considering the “natural wants 
of mankind which are to be supplied,” a subject which has since 
acquired the title of “consumption” in economic treatises. Then he 
showed th^ opulence arises from division of labour, and why this 
is so, and how the division of labour “occasions a multiplication of 
the product, and why it must be proportioned to the extent of 
commerce. “Thus,” he said, “the division of labour is the great cause 
of the increase of public opulence, which is always proportioned to 
the industry of the people, and not to the quantity of gold and 
silver as is foolishly imagined.” “Having thus shown what gives 
occasion to public opulence,” he said he would go on to consider: — 

‘Tirst, what circumstances regulate the price of commodities: 

“Secondly, money in two different views, first as the measure of 
value and then as the instrument of commerce: 

“Thirdly, the history of commerce, in which shall be taken notice 
of the causes of the slow progress of opulence, both in an- 
cient and modern times, which causes shall be shown either 
to affect agriculture or arts and manufactures; 

p. 154. 

’^Ibidy p. 156. 

Lectures, p. 157, 

^°Ibid., p. 163. 



editor’s introduction ^ 

“Lastly, the effects of a commercial spirit, on the government, tem- 
per, and manners of a people, whether good or bad, and the 
proper remedies.”®® 

Under the first of these heads he treated of natural and market 
price and of difference of wages, and showed “that whatever police 
tends to raise the market price above the natural, tends to diminish 
public opulence.” Among such pernicious regulations he enumer- 
ated taxes upon necessaries, monopolies, and exclusive privileges of 
corporations. Regulations which bring market price below natural 
price he regarded as equally pernicious, and therefore he con- 
demned the corn bounty, which attracted into agriculture stock 
which would have been better employed in some other trade. “It is 
by far the best police to leave things to their natural course.” 

Under the second head he explained the reasons for the use of 
money as a common standard and its consequential use as the 
instrument of commerce. He showed why gold and silver were 
commonly chosen and why coinage was introduced, and proceeded 
to explain the evils of tampering with the currency, and the diffi- 
culty of keeping gold and silver money in circulation at the same 
time. Money being a dead stock, banks and paper credit, which 
enable money to be dispensed with and sent abroad, are beneficial. 
The money sent abroad will “bring home materials for food, clothes, 
and lodging,” and, “whatever commodities are imported, just so 
much is added to the opulence of the country.” It is “a bad police 
to restrain” banks.^® Mun, “a London merchant,” affirmed “that as 
England is drained of its money it must go to ruin.” “Mr, Gee, 
likewise a merchant,” endeavoured to “show that England would 
soon be ruined by trade with foreign countries,” and that “in al- 
most all our commercial dealings with other nations we are 
losers.” Mr. Hume had shown the absurdity of these and other 
such doctrines, though even he had not kept quite clear of “the 
notion that public opulence consists in money.” Money is not 
consumable, and “the consumptibility, if we may use the word, of 
goods, is the great cause of human industry.” 

pp. 173-3* 

^ Ibid,, p. 178. 

^ Ibid., p. 182. 

^Lectures, p. 192. 

"^Ibid., p. 195. 

"^^ Ibid , p. 195. 

Ibid., p. 196. 

^^Ibid., p. 197. 

“^^Ibid., p. 199. 



xxxii editor’s INTRODUCTION 

The absurd opinion that riches consist in money had given rise 
to ‘^many prejudicial errors in practice,” such as the prohibition 
of the exportation of coin and attempts to secure a favourable bal- 
ance of trade. There will always be plenty of money if things are 
left to their free course, and no prohibition of exportation will be 
effectual. The desire to secure a favourable balance of trade has 
led to “most pernicious regulations,” such as the restrictions on 
trade with France. 

“The absurdity of these regulations will appear on the least reflec- 
tion. All commerce that is carried on betwixt any two countries must 
necessarily be advantageous to both. The very intention of commerce 
is to exchange your own commodities for others which you think will 
be more convenient for you. When two men trade between themselves 
it is undoubtedly for the advantage of both. . . . The case is exactly 
the same betwixt any two nations. The goods which the English mer- 
chants want to import from France are certainly more valuable to 
them than what they give for them.” 

These jealousies and prohibitions were most hurtful to the lich- 
est nations, and it would benefit France and England especially, 
if “all national prejudices were rooted out and a free and uninter- 
rupted commerce established.” No nation was ever ruined by 
this balance of trade. All political writers since the time of Charles 
II. had been prophesying “that in a few years we would be re- 
duced to an absolute state of poverty,” but “we find ourselves far 
richer than before.” 

The erroneous notion that national opulence consists in money 
had also given rise to the absurd opinion that “no home consump- 
tion can hurt the opulence of a country,” 

It was this notion too that led to Law’s Mississippi scheme, com- 
pared to which our own South Sea scheme was a trifle.^^ 

Interest does not depend on the value of money, but on the quan- 
tity of stock. Exchange is a method of dispensing with the trans- 
mission of money 

Under the third heading, the history of commerce, or the causes 
of the slow progress of opulence, Adam Smith dealt with “first, 
natural impediments, and secondly, the oppression of civil govern- 

^Ibid., p. 200. 

^ Ibid., p. 204. 

^ Ibid., p. 204. 

^Lectures, p. 206. 

^ Ibid., p. 207. 

Ibid., p. 209. 

^^Ibid., pp. 211-19. 

Ibid , pp. 219-22. 



editor’s introduction 

ment.” He is not recorded to have mentioned any natural im- 
pediments except the absence of division of labour in rude and 
barbarous times owing to the want of stock.^^ But on the oppres- 
sion of civil government he had much to say. At first governments 
were so feeble that they could not offer their subjects that security 
without which no man has any motive to be industrious. After- 
wards, when governments became powerful enough to give internal 
security, they fought among themselves, and their subjects were 
harried by foreign enemies. Agriculture was hindered by great 
tracts of land being thrown into the hands of single persons. This 
led at first to cultivation by slaves, who had no motive to industry; 
then came tenants by steelbow (metayers) who had no sufficient 
inducement to improve the land; finally the present method of cul- 
tivation by tenants was introduced, but these for a long time were 
insecure in their holdings, and had to pay rent in kind, which made 
them liable to be severely affected by bad seasons. Feudal subsidies 
discouraged industry, the law of primogeniture, entails, and the 
exp mse of transferring land prevented the large estates from being 
divided. The restrictions on the export of corn helped to stop the 
progress of agriculture. Progress in arts and commerce was also 
hindered by slavery, as well as by the ancient contempt for indus- 
try and commerce, by the want of enforcement of contracts, by 
the various difficulties and dangers of transport, by the establish- 
ment of fairs, markets and staple towns, by duties on imports and 
exports, and by monopolies, corporation privileges, the statute of 
apprenticeship and bounties.'^^ 

Under the fourth and last head, the influence of commerce on 
the manners of a people, Smith pronounced that “whenever com- 
merce is introduced into any country probity and punctuality al- 
ways accompany it.'' The trader deals so often that he finds hon- 
esty is the best policy. “Politicians are not the most remarkable 
men in the world for probity and punctuality. Ambassadors from 
different nations are still less so," the reason being that nations 
treat with one another much more seldom than merchants. 

But certain inconveniences arise from a commercial spirit. Men's 
views are confined, and “when a person's whole attention is be- 
stowed on the seventeenth part of a pin or the eightieth part of a 
button," he becomes stupid. Education is neglected. In Scotland 

*** Ibid,, p. 222. 

pp. 222-3. 

^Lectures, pp. 223-36. 

*^lbid,, p. 253. 

Ibid., p. 254. 

^^Ibid,, p. 255. 



xxxiv editor’s introduction 

the meanest porter can read and write, but at Birmingham boys of 
six or seven can earn threepence or sixpence a day, so that their 
parents set them to work early and their education is neglected. To 
be able merely to read is good as it “gives people the benefit of re- 
ligion, which is a great advantage, not only considered in a pious 
sense, but as it affords them subject for thought and specula- 
tion.” There is too “another great loss which attends the put- 
ting boys too soon to work.” The boys throw off parental authority, 
and betake themselves to drunkenness and riot. The workmen in 
the commercial parts of England are consequently in a “despicable 
condition; their work through half the week is sufficient to main- 
tain them, and through want of education they have no amusement 
for the other but riot and debauchery. So it may very justly be said 
that the people who clothe the whole world are in rags them- 
selves.” 

Further, commerce sinks courage and extinguishes martial spir- 
it; the defence of the country is handed over to a special class, and 
the bulk of the people grow effeminate and dastardly, as was shown 
by the fact that in 1745 “four or five thousand naked unarmed 
Highlanders would have overturned the government of Great Bri- 
tain with little difficulty if they had not been opposed by a stand- 
ing army.” 

“To remedy” these evils introduced by commerce “would be an 
object worthy of serious attention.” 

Revenue, at any rate in the year when the notes of his lectures 
were made, was treated by Adam Smith before the last head of po- 
lice just discussed, ostensibly on the ground that it was in reality 
one of the causes of the slow progress of opulence.*''*- 

Originally, he taught, no revenue was necessary; the magistrate 
was satisfied with the eminence of his station and any presents he 
might receive. The receipt of presents soon led to corruption. At 
first too soldiers were unpaid, but this did not last. The earliest 
method adopted for supplying revenue was assignment of lands to 
the support of government. To maintain the British government 
would require at least a fourth of the whole of the land of the coun- 
try. “After government becomes expensive, it is the worst possible 
method to support it by a land rent.” Civilisation and expensive 
government go together. 

Taxes may be divided into taxes upon possessions and taxes 

^Uhid., p. 256. 

pp. 256, 257. 

Lectures, p. 258. 

Ibid., p. 236. 

^Ibid., p. 239. 



editor’s introduction XXXV 

upon commodities. It is easy to tax land, but difficult to tax stock 
or money ; the land tax is very cheaply collected and does not raise 
the price of commodities and thus restrict the number of persons 
who have stock sufficient to carry on trade in them. It is hard on 
the landlords to have to pay both land tax and taxes on consump- 
tion, which fact ^^perhaps occasions the continuance of what is 
called the Tory interest.” 

Taxes on consumptions are best levied by way of excise. They 
have the advantage of “being paid imperceptibly,” since “when 
we buy a pound of tea we do not reflect that the most part of the 
price is a duty paid to the government, and therefore pay it con- 
tentedly, as though it were only the natural price of the commo- 
dity.” Such taxes too are less likely to ruin people than a land 
tax, as they can always reduce their expenditure on dutiable ar- 
ticles. 

A fixed land tax like the English is better than one which varies 
with the rent like the French, and “the English are the best finan- 
ciers in Europe, and their taxes are levied with more propriety than 
those of any other country whatever.” Taxes on importation are 
hurtful because they divert industry into an unnatural channel, 
but taxes on exportation are worse. The common belief that wealth 
consists in money has not been so hurtful as might have been ex- 
pected in regard to taxes on imports, since it has accidentally led 
to the encouragement of the import of raw material and discour- 
agement of the import of manufactured articles.^® 

From treating of revenue Adam Smith was very naturally led 
on to deal with national debts, and this led him into a discussion of 
the causes of the rise and fall of stocks and the practice of stock- 
jobbing.^^*^ 

Under Arms he taught that at first the whole people goes out to 
war: then only the upper classes go and the meanest stay to culti- 
vate the ground. But afterwards the introduction of arts and manu- 
factures makes it inconvenient for the rich to leave their business, 
and the defence of the state falls to the meanest. “This is our pres- 
ent condition in Great Britain.” Discipline now becomes neces- 
sary and standing armies are introduced. The best sort of army is 
“a militia commanded by landed gentlemen in possession of the 

pp. 241, 242. 

^ Ibid.f pp. 242, 243. 

Lectures f p. 243. 

Ibid,, p. 245. 

^ Ibid,, pp. 246, 247. 

Ibid., pp. 247-52. 

^Ibid., p. 261. 



xxxvi editor’s introduction 

public offices of the nation,” which ‘^can never have any prospect 
of sacrificing the liberties of the country.” This is the case in 
Sweden. 

Now let us compare with this the drift of the Wealth of Nations, 
not as it is described in the “Introduction and Plan,” but as we find 
it in the body of the work itself. 

Book I. begins by showing that the greatest improvement in the 
productive powers of industry is due to division of labour. From 
division of labour it proceeds to money, because money is necessary 
in order to facilitate division of labour, which depends upon ex- 
change. This naturally leads to a discussion of the terms on which 
exchanges are effected, or value and price. Consideration of price 
reveals the fact that it is divided between wages, profit and rent, 
and is therefore dependent on the rates of wages, profit and rent, 
so that it is necessary to discuss in four chapters variations in these 
rates. 

Book II. treats first of the nature and divisions of stock, second- 
ly of a particularly important portion of it, namely money, and the 
means by which that part may be economised by the operations 
of banking, and thirdly the accumulation of capital, which is con- 
nected with the employment of productive labour. Fourthly it con- 
siders the rise and fall of the rate of interest, and fifthly and lastly 
the comparative advantage of different methods of employing 
capital. 

Book III, shows that the natural progress of opulence is to direct 
capital, first to agriculture, then to manufactures, and lastly to 
foreign commerce, but that this order has been inverted by the 
policy of modern European states. 

Book IV. deals with two different systems of political economy: 
(i) the system of commerce, and (2) the system of agriculture, 
but the space given to the former, even in the first edition, is eight 
times as great as that given to the latter. The first chapter shows 
the absurdity of the principle of the commercial or mercantile sys- 
tem, that wealth is dependent on the balance of trade; the next 
five discuss in detail and show the futility of the various mean and 
malignant expedients by which the mercantilists endeavoured to 
secure their absurd object, namely, general protectionist duties, 
prohibitions and heavy duties directed against the importation of 
goods from particular countries with which the balance is supposed 
to be disadvantageous, drawbacks, bounties, and treaties of com- 
merce. The seventh chapter, which is a long one, deals with colo- 
nies. According to the forecast at the end of chapter i. this subject 
Ibid., p. 263. 



editor’s introduction xxxvii 

comes here because colonies were established in order to encourage 
exportation by means of peculiar privileges and monopolies. But 
in the chapter itself there is no sign of this. The history and prog- 
ress of colonies is discussed for its own sake, and it is not alleged 
that important colonies have been founded with the object sug- 
gested in chapter i. 

In the last chapter of the Book, the physiocratic system is de- 
scribed, and judgement is pronounced against it as well as the com- 
mercial system. The proper system is that of natural liberty, which 
discharges the sovereign from ^The duty of superintending the in- 
dustry of private people and of directing it towards the employ- 
ments most suitable to the interest of the society.” 

Book V. deals with the expenses of the sovereign in performing 
the duties left to him, the revenues necessary to meet those ex- 
penses and the results of expenses exceeding revenue. The discus- 
sion of expenses of defence includes discussion of different kinds of 
military organisation, courts of law, means of maintaining public 
works, education, and ecclesiastical establishments. 

Putting these two sketches together we can easily see how closely 
related the book is to the lectures. 

The title ^Tolice” being dropped as not sufficiently indicating 
the subject, there is no necessity for the mention of cleanliness, and 
the remarks on security are removed to the chapter on the accumu- 
lation of capital. The two sections on the natural wants of mankind 
are omitted, illustrating once more the difficulty which econo- 
mists have generally felt about consumption. The next four sec- 
tions, on division of labour, develop into the first three chapters of 
Book I. of the Wealth of Nations. At this point in the lectures there 
is an abrupt transition to prices, followed by money, the history of 
commerce and the effects of a commercial spirit, but in the Wealth 
of Nations this is avoided by taking money next, as the machinery 
by the aid of which labour is divided, and then proceeding by a 
very natural transition to prices. In the lectures the discussion of 
money led to a consideration of the notion that wealth consisted in 
money and of all the pernicious consequences of that delusion in 
restricting banking and foreign trade. This was evidently over- 
loading the theory of money, and consequently banking is post- 
poned to the Book about capital, on the ground that it dispenses 
with money, which is a dead stock, and thus economises capital, 
while the commercial policy is relegated by itself to Book IV. In 
the lectures, again, wages are only dealt with slightly under prices, 
and profits and rent not at all; in the Wealth of Nations wages. 

There is a reminiscence of them in the chapter on Rent, pp. 163-4 



xxxviii editor’s INTRODUCTION 

profits and rent are dealt with at length as component parts of 
price, and the whole produce of the country is said to be distrib- 
uted into them as three shares. 

The next part of the lectures, that dealing with the causes of 
the slow progress of opulence, forms the foundation for Book III, 
of the Wealth of Nations, The influence of commerce on manners 
disappears as an independent heading, but most of the matter 
dealt with under it is utilised in the discussions of education and 
military organisation. 

Besides consumption, two other subjects, stock-jobbing and 
the Mississippi scheme, which are treated at some length in the 
lectures, are altogether omitted in the Wealth of Nations. The 
description of stock-jobbing was probably left out because better 
suited to the youthful hearers of the lectures than to the maturer 
readers of the book. The Mississippi scheme was omitted, Smith 
himself says, because it had been adequately discussed by Du 
Verney. 

Here and there discrepancies may be found between the opin- 
ions expressed in the lectures and those expressed in the book. The 
reasonable and straightforward view of the effects of the corn 
bounty is replaced by a more recondite though less satisfactory 
doctrine. The remark as to the inconvenience of regulations on 
foreign commerce having been alleviated by the fact that they en- 
courage trade with countries from which imported raw materials 
came and discourage it with those from which manufactured goods 
came does not reappear in the book. The passage in the Lectures 
is probably much condensed, and perhaps misrepresents what 
Adam Smith said. If it does not, it shows him to have been not en- 
tirely free from protectionist fallacies at the time the lectures were 
delivered.®^ 

There are some very obvious additions, the most prominent be- 
ing ’the account of the French physiocratic or agricultural system 
which occupies the last chapter of Book IV. The article on the re- 
lations of church and state (Bk. V., ch. i., pt. iii., art. 3) also ap- 
pears to be a clear addition, at any rate in so far as the lectures on 
police and revenue are concerned, but, as we shall see presently, 
tradition seems to say that Smith did deal with ecclesiastical estab- 
lishments in this department of his lectures on jurisprudence, so 
that possibly the lecture notes are deficient at this particular point, 
or the subject was omitted for the particular year in which the 
notes were taken. Then there is the long chapter on colonies. The 

^ See above, p. xxxv. 

See below, pp. liv, Iv, for a conjecture on this subject. 



editor’s introduction xxxix 

fact of colonies having attracted Adam Smith’s attention during 
the interval between the lectures and the publication of his book 
is not very surprising when we remember that the interval coincid- 
ed almost exactly with the period from the beginning of the at- 
tempt to tax the colonies to the Declaration of Independence. 

But these additions are of small importance compared with the 
introduction of the theory of stock or capital and unproductive 
labour in Book II., the slipping of a theory of distribution into the 
theory of prices towards the end of Book I., chapter vi., and the 
emphasising of the conception of annual produce. These changes 
do not make so much real difference to Smith’s own work as might 
be supposed; the theory of distribution, though it appears in the 
title of Book I., is no essential part of the work and could easily 
be excised by deleting a few paragraphs in Book I., chapter vi., and 
a few lines elsewhere; if Book II. were altogether omitted the 
other Books could stand perfectly well by themselves. But to sub- 
sequent economics they were of fundamental importance. They 
settled the form of economic treatises for a century at least. 

They were of course due to the acquaintance with the French 
Economistes which Adam Smith made during his visit to France 
with the Duke of Buccleugh in 1764-6. It has been said that he 
might have been acquainted with many works of this school before 
the notes of his lectures were taken, and so he might. But the notes 
of his lectures are good evidence to show that as a matter of fact he 
was not, or at any rate that he had not assimilated their main 
economic theories. When we find that there is no trace of these 
theories in the Lectures and a great deal in the Wealth of Nations , 
and that in the meantime Adam Smith had been to France and 
mixed with all the prominent members of the ^^sect,” including their 
master, Quesnay, it is difficult to understand why we should be 
asked, without any evidence, to refrain from believing that he 
came under physiocratic influence after and not before or during 
his Glasgow period. 

The confession of faith of the Economistes is embodied in Ques- 
nay’s Tableau Economique, which one of them described as 
worthy of being ranked, along with writing and money, as one of 
the three greatest inventions of the human race.®’"'* It is reprinted 
below from the facsimile of the edition of 1759, published by the 
British Economic Association (now the Royal Economic Society) 
in 1894. 

Those who are curious as to the exact meaning of the zigzag lines 
may study Quesnay’s Explication^ which the British Economic 


Below, p. 643, note 19. 



xi editor’s introduction 

TABLEAU ECONOMIQUE, 

Ohjets d considSrer, i°. Trois sortes de d6penses^ 2®. leur source; 3°. leurs 
avances; 4®. leur distribution; 5®. leurs effets^ 6®. leur reproduction; 7®. 
leurs rapports entr^elleSj 8®. leurs rapports awe la population; 9®. avec 
V Agriculture; 10®. awe Vindustrie; ii®. avec le commerce; 12®. avec la 
masse des richesses d^une Nation, 

dMpensbs Dispenses du revenu, defenses 

FRODUCTIVES VImpdt pril&oe, se partagtt STERILES 
relatives d aux Depenses j^odtictives ei relatives^ d 

V Agriculture^ b‘c. aux Depenses steriles. Vindustrie, &*c. 


Avances annudles 

Revernt 

Avances annuelles 

pour produire un revenu de 

annuel 

pour les Ouvrages des 

tooll sont 600 II 

de 

Depenses steriles, sont 

QQO'' prwlnueiti net,..* 


300 “ 

Prodaefions " * 

****..^ 

Onvragcs, 

SOQ^C rejirodutsent net 

....300^ 

^' 300 !! 

” •" 

i 




’**'* - 


\5C{^prodnl\ent net 

....150 

‘’3‘.*!::i5o 





7 X^rrprod un eul vet 


...."..75 

37, lOT.,rf}>rodtn.\eni net 

37.10 

;7.‘.’V37. 10 

18. iSijxjmldmseut vet 

18.15. 

14 

vet.. ... 

9...7,..S^ 



4.1.$... ^icproTitueiil net 

4.I.$..!.9. 

13...9 

lOuxpwjildseuJ net, 

2...6.I0. 



net 

l....$...5. 

;;.:.’.:::3...3...5 

V.: 




QA\,.,Z.rrpf^dmsenl net 

0.11. ..8. 

1 1 ...s 

0.,.,5. IQL.tcpioduiscHt net. 

0...5.10- 


0 ... 2 , 1 tTirprfxlfdscM nej 

0...2.11. 


0. .. J ..,S reprdduisent net 

.. ....0...i...5. 




b’c, 

REFRODUIT TOTAL 600II, de reomu; de pluSj les frais annuels 

de 600II et les intsrits des avances primitives dtt LaboureuTf de 300/Z que la terre 
restitue. Ainsi la reproduction est de i^ooll compris le reoenu de 600IL qiii est la 
base du calculi abstraction faite de Vimpdt prilevb, et des avances qu*exige sa 
reproduction annuelle, ^c, Voyez V Explication d la page suivante. 


editor’s introduction 

Association published along with the table in 1894. For our pres- 
ent purposes it is sufficient to see (i) that it involves a conception 
of the whole annual produce or reproduction of a country; (2) 
that it teaches that some labour is unproductive, that to maintain 
the annual produce certain ^^avances^^ are necessary, and that this 
annual produce is “distributed.” Adam Smith, as his chapter on 
agricultural systems shows, did not appreciate the minutiae of the 
table very highly, but he certainly took these main ideas and 
adapted them as well as he could to his Glasgow theories. With 
those theories the conception of an annual produce was in no way 
inconsistent, and he had no difficulty in adopting annual produce 
as the wealth -of a nation, though he very often forgetfully falls 
back into older ways of speaking. As to unproductive labour, he 
was not prepared to condemn the whole of Glasgow industry as 
sterile, but was ready to place the mediaeval retainer and even the 
modern menial servant in the unproductive class. He would even 
go a little farther and put along with them all whose labour did 
not produce particular vendible objects, or who were not employed 
for the money-gain of their employers. Becoming somewhat con- 
fused among these distinctions and the physiocratic doctrine of 
^^avances^^ he imagined a close connexion between the employ- 
ment of productive labour and the accumulation and employment 
of capital. Hence with the aid of the common observation that 
where a capitalist appears, labourers soon spring up, he arrived at 
the view that the amount of capital in a country determines the 
number of “useful and productive” labourers. Finally he slipped 
into his theory of prices and their component parts the suggestion 
that as the price of any one commodity is divided between wages, 
profits and rent, so the whole produce is divided between labourers, 
capitalists, \ and landlords. 

These ideas about capital and unproductive labour are certain- 
ly of great irnportance in the history of economic theory, but they 
were fundamentally unsound, and were never so universally ac- 
cepted as is commonly supposed. The conception of the wealth of 
nations as an annual produce, annually distributed, however, has 
been of immense value. Like other conceptions of the kind it was 
certain to cbme. It might have been evolved direct from Davenant 
or Petty nearly a century before. We need not suppose that some 
one else would not soon have given it its place in English econom- 
ics if Adam Smith had not done so, but that need not deter us from 
recording the fact that it was he who introduced it, and that he in- 
troduced it in consequence of his association with the Economistes. 

If we attempt to carry the history of the origin of the Wealth of 



xlii EDITOR^S INTRODUCTION 

Nations farther back than the date of the lecture notes in 1763 or 
thereabouts, we can still find a small amount of authentic informa- 
tion. We know that Smith must have been using practically the 
same divisions in his lectures in 1759, since he promises in the last 
paragraph of the Moral Sentiments published in that year, ^^an- 
other discourse” in which he would “endeavour to give an account 
of the general principles of law and government, and of the differ- 
ent revolutions they have undergone in the different ages and 
periods of society, not only in what concerns justice, but in what 
concerns police, revenue and arms, and whatever else is the object 
of law.” It seems probable, however, that the economic portion of 
the lectures was not always headed “police, revenue, and arms,” 
since Millar, who attended the lectures when they were first de- 
livered in 1751-2, says: — 

“In the last part of his lectures he examined those political regula- 
tions which are founded not upon the principle of justice^ but that of 
expediency^ and which are calculated to increase the riches, the power 
and the prosperity of a state. Under this view, he considered the po- 
litical institutions relating to commerce, to finances, to ecclesiastical 
and military establishments. What he delivered on these subjects con- 
tained the substance of the work he afterwards published under the 
title of ‘An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Na- 
tions’.”®® 

Of course this is not necessarily inconsistent with the economic 
lectures having been denominated police, revenue, and arms, even 
at that early date, but the italicising of “justice” and “expediency,” 
if due to Millar, rather suggests the contrary, and there is no deny- 
ing that the arrangement of “cheapness or plenty” under “police” 
may very well have been an afterthought fallen upon to justify the 
introduction of a mass of economic material into lectures on Juris- 
prudence. As to the reason why that introduction took place the 
circumstances of Smith’s first active session at Glasgow suggest 
another motive besides his love for the subject, which, we may 
notice, did not prevent him from publishing his views on Ethics 
first. 

His first appointment at Glasgow, it must be remembered, was 
to the Professorship of Logic in January, 1751, but his engage- 
ments at Edinburgh prevented his performing the duties that ses- 
sion. Before the beginning of next session he was asked to act as 

®®Dugald Stewart, in his “Account of the Life and Writings of Adam 
Smith, read to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in 1795 and published in 
Adam Smith’s posthumous Essays on Philosophical Subjects, 1795, p. xviii. 
See Rae, Life of Adam Smith, pp. 53-5. 



xliii 


editor’s introduction 

deputy for Craigie, the Professor of Moral Philosophy, who was 
going away for the benefit of his health. He consented, and conse- 
quently in the session of 1751-2 he had to begin the work of two 
professorships, as to one of which he had very little previous warn- 
ing.^*’’^ Every teacher in such a position would do his best to 
utilise any suitable material which he happened to have by him, 
and most men would even stretch a point to utilise even what was 
not perfectly suitable. 

Now we know that Adam Smith possessed in manuscript in the 
hand of a clerk employed by him certain lectures which he read at 
Edinburgh in the winter of 1750-1, and we know that in these lec- 
tures he preached the doctrine of the beneficial effects of freedom, 
and, according to Dugald Stewart, ‘‘many of the most important 
opinions in the Wealth of Nations*" There existed when Stewart 
wrote, “a short manuscript drawn up by Mr. Smith in the year 
1755 and presented by him to a society of which he was then a 
member.” Stewart says of this paper: — 


“Many of the most important opinions in The Wealth of Nations 
are there detailed; but I shall quote only the following sentences: 
‘Man is generally considered by statesmen and projectors as the ma- 
terials of a sort of political mechanics. Projectors disturb nature in 
the course of her operations in human affairs; and it requires no more 
than to let her alone, and give her fair play in the pursuit of her ends 
that she may establish her own designs.’ And in another passage: ‘Lit- 
tle else is requisite to carry a state to the highest degree of opulence 
from the lowest barbarism, but peace, easy taxes, and a tolerable ad- 
ministration of justice; all the rest being brought about by the natural 
course of things. All governments which thwart this natural course, 
which force things into another channel or which endeavour to arrest 
the progress of society at a particular point, are unnatural, and to 
support themselves are obliged to be oppressive and tyrannical. — ^A 
great part of the opinions,’ he observes, ‘enumerated in this paper is 
treated of at length in some lectures which I have still by me, and 
which were written in the hand of a clerk who left my service six years 
ago. They have all of them been the constant subjects of my lectures 
since I first taught Mr. Craigie’s class, the first winter I spent in Glas- 
gow, down to this day, without any considerable variation. They had 
all of them been the subjects of lectures which I read at Edinburgh 
the winter before I left it, and I can adduce innumerable witnesses 
both from that place and from this, who will ascertain them suffici- 
ently to be mine.’ ” 

®^Rae, Life of Adam Smith, pp. 42-5. 

‘^Stewart, in Smith’s Essays, pp. Ixxx, Ixxxi. 



xliv editor’s introduction 

It seems then that, when confronted with the two professorial 
chairs in 1751, Smith had by him some lectures on progress, very 
likely explaining “the slow progress of opulence,” and that, as 
anyone in such circumstances would have liked to do, he put them 
into his moral philosophy course. 

As it happened, there was no difficulty in doing this. It seems 
nearly certain that Craigie himself suggested that it should be 
done. The request that Smith would take Craigie^s work came 
through Cullen, and in answering Cullen’s letter, which has not 
been preserved, Smith says, “You mention natural jurisprudence 
and politics as the parts of his lectures which it would be most 
agreeable for me to teach. I shall very willingly undertake both.” 
Craigie doubtless knew what Smith had been lecturing upon in 
Edinburgh in the previous winter and called it “politics.” 

Moreover the traditions of the Chair of Moral Philosophy, as 
known to Adam Smith, required a certain amount of economics. 
A dozen years earlier he had himself been a student when Francis 
Hutcheson was professor. So far as we can judge from Hutcheson’s 
System of Moral Philosophy, which, as Dr. W. R. Scott has 
shown,*^® was already in existence when Smith was a student, 
though not published till 1755, Hutcheson lectured first on Ethics, 
next upon what might very well be called Natural Jurisprudence, 
and thirdly upon Civil Polity. Through the two latter parts a con- 
siderable quantity of economic doctrine is scattered. 

In considering “The Necessity of a Social Life,” Hutcheson 
points out that a man in solitude, however strong and instructed in 
the arts, “could scarce procure to himself the bare necessaries of 
life even in the best soils or climates.” 

“Nay ’tis well known that the produce of the labours of any given 
number, twenty for instance, in providing the necessaries or conven- 
iences of life, shall be much greater by assigning to one a certain sort 
of work of one kind in which he will soon acquire skill and dexterity, 
and to another assigning work of a different kind, than if each one of 
the twenty were obliged to employ himself by turns in all the differ- 
ent sorts of labour requisite for his subsistence without sufficient dex- 
terity in any. In the former method each procures a great quantity of 
goods of one kind, and can exchange a part of it for such goods ob- 
tained by the labours of others as he shall stand in need of. One grows 
expert in tillage, another in pasture and breeding cattle, a third in ma- 

Rae, Life of Adam Smith, pp. 43-4. 

R. Scott, Francis Hutcheson, 1900, pp. 210, 231. In the Introduc- 
tion to Moral Philosophy, 1747, Civil Polity is replaced by “CEconomicks 
and Politicks,” but “CEconomicks” only means domestic law, f.e., the rights 
of husbands and wives, parents and children, masters and servants. 



editor’s introduction xlv 

sonry, a fourth in the chase, a fifth in iron-works, a sixth in the arts 
of the loom, and so on throughout the rest. Thus all are supplied by 
means of barter with the works of complete artists. In the other meth- 
od scarce any one could be dexterous and skilful in any one sort of 
labour. 

“Again, some works of the highest use to multitudes can be effec- 
tually executed by the joint labours of many, which the separate la- 
bours of the same number could never have executed. The joint force 
of many can repel dangers arising from savage beasts or bands of rob- 
bers which might have been fatal to many individuals were they sep- 
arately to encounter them. The joint labours of twenty men will cul- 
tivate forests or drain marshes, for farms to each one, and provide 
houses for habitation and inclosures for their flocks, much sooner than 
the separate labours of the same number. By concert and alternate re- 
lief they can keep a perpetual watch, which without concert they could 
not accomplish.” ” 

In explaining the “Foundation of Property” Hutcheson says 
that when population was scanty, the country fertile and the cli- 
mate mild, there was not much need for developing the rules of 
property, but as things are, “universal industry is plainly neces- 
sary for the support of mankind” and men must be excited to 
labour by self-interest and family affection. If the fruits of men’s 
labours are not secured to them, “one has no other motive to la- 
bour than the general affection to his kind, which is commonly 
much weaker than the narrower affections to our friends and re- 
lations, not to mention the opposition which in this case would be 
given by most of the selfish ones.” Willing industry could not be 
secured in a communistic society 

The largest continuous block of economic doctrine in the Sy^- 
tem of Moral Philosophy is to be found in the chapter on “The 
Values of Goods in Commerce and the Nature of Coin” which 
occurs in the middle of the discussion of contracts. In this chapter 
it is pointed out that it is necessary for commerce that goods 
should be valued. The values of goods depend on the demand for 
them and the difficulty of acquiring them. Values must be meas- 
ured by some common standard, and this standard must be some- 
thing generally desired, so that men may be generally willing to 
take it in exchange. To secure this it should be something portable, 
divisible without loss, and durable. Gold and silver best fulfil these 
requirements. At first they were used by quantity or weight, with- 
out coinage, but eventually the state vouched for quantity and 
quality by its stamp. The stamp being “easy workmanship” adds 

System of Moral Philosophy, vol. i., pp. 288, 289. 

System of Moral Philosophy, vol. i., pp. 319-21. 



xivi editor’s introduction 

no considerable value. “Coin is ever valued as a commodity in 
commerce as well as other goods; and that in proportion to the 
rarity of the metal, for the demand is universal.'' The only way to 
raise its value artificially would be by restricting the produce of 
the mines. 

“We say indeed commonly, that the rates of labour and goods have 
risen since these metals grew plenty; and that the rates of labour and 
goods were low when the metals were scarce; conceiving the value of 
the metals as invariable, because the legal names of the pieces, the 
pounds, shillings or pence, cpntinue to them always the same till a law 
alters them. But a day's digging or ploughing was as uneasy to a man 
a thousand years ago as it is now, though he could not then get so 
much silver for it: and a barrel of wheat, or beef, was then of the 
same use to support the human body, as it is now when it is exchanged 
for four times as much silver. Properly, the value of labour, grain, 
and cattle are always pretty much the same, as they afford the same 
uses in life, where no new inventions of tillage or pasturage cause a 
greater quantity in proportion to the demand.” 

Lowering and raising the coins are unjust and pernicious opera- 
tions. Copious mines abate the value of the precious metals. 

“The standard itself is varying insensibly; and therefore if we would 
settle fixed salaries which in all events would answer the same pur- 
poses of life, or support those entituled to them in the same condition 
with respect to others, they should neither be fixed in the legal names 
of coin, nor in a certain number of ounces of gold and silver. A decree 
of state may change the legal names; and the value of the ounces may 
alter by the increase or decrease of the quantities of these metals. Nor 
should such salaries be fixed in any quantities of more ingenious man- 
ufactures, for nice contrivances to facilitate labour may lower the 
value of such goods. The most invariable salary would be so many 
days labour of men, or a fixed quantity of goods produced by the 
plain inartificial labours, such goods as answer the ordinary purposes 
of life. Quantities of grain come nearest to such a standard.” 

Prices of goods depend upon the expenses, the interest of money 
employed, and the “labours too, the care, attention, accounts and 
correspondence about them.” Sometimes we must “take in also the 
condition of the person so employed,” since “the expense of his 
station of life must be defrayed by the price of such labours; and 
they deserve compensation as much as any other. This additional 
price of their labours is the just foundation of the ordinary profit 
of merchants.” 

'^System of Moral Philosophy, vol. ii., p. 58. 
vol. ii., pp. 62, 63. 



editor’s introduction Xlvii 

In the next chapter, on “The Principal Contracts in a Social 
Life,” we find the rent or hire of unfruitful goods, such as houses, 
justified on the ground that the proprietor might have employed 
his money or labour on goods naturally fruitful. 

“If in any way of trade men can make far greater gains by help of 
a large stock of money than they could have made without it, ’tis but 
just that he who supplies them with the money, the necessary means 
of this gain, should have for the use of it some share of the profit, 
equal at least to the profit he could have made by purchasing things 
naturally fruitful or yielding a rent. This shows the just foundation 
of interest upon money lent, though it be not naturally fruitful. Hous- 
es yield no fruits or increase, nor will some arable grounds yield any 
without great labour. Labour employed in managing money in trade 
or manufactures will make it as fruitful as anything. Were interest 
prohibited, none would lend except in charity; and many industrious 
hands who are not objects of charity would be excluded from large 
gains in a way very advantageous to the public.” 

Reasonable interest varies with the state of trade and the quan- 
tity of coin. In a newly settled country great profits are made by 
small sums, and land is worth fewer years^ purchase, so that a 
higher interest is reasonable. Laws in settling interest must fol- 
low “these natural causes,” otherwise they will be evaded.*^® 

In the chapter “Of the Nature of Civil Laws and their Execu- 
tion,” we find that after piety the virtues most necessary to a state 
are sobriety, industry, justice and fortitude. 

“Industry is the natural mine of wealth, the fund of all stores for 
exportation by the surplus of which beyond the value of what a nation 
imports, it must increase in wealth and power. Diligent agriculture 
must furnish the necessaries of life and the materials for all manu- 
factures; and all mechanic arts should be encouraged to prepare them 
for use and exportation. Goods prepared for export should generally 
be free from all burdens and taxes, and so should the goods be which 
are necessarily consumed by the artificers, as much as possible; that 
no other country be able to undersell like goods at a foreign market. 
Where one country alone has certain materials, they may safely im- 
pose duties upon them when exported; but such moderate ones as 
shall not prevent the consumption of them abroad. 

“If people have not acquired an habit of industry, the cheapness of 
all the necessaries of life rather encourages sloth. The best remedy is 
to raise the demand for all necessaries; not merely by premiums upon 
exporting them, which is often useful too; but by increasing the num- 

System of Moral Philosophy, pp. 71-2. 

Ibid., vol. ii., p. 73. 



xlviii editor’s INTRODUCTION 

ber of people who consume them; and when they are dear, more la- 
bour and application will be requisite in all trades and arts to procure 
them. Industrious foreigners should therefore be invited to us, and all 
men of industry should live with us unmolested and easy. Encourage- 
ment should be given to marriage and to those who rear a numerous 
offspring to industry. The unmarried should pay higher taxes as they 
are not at the charge of rearing new subjects to the state. Any foolish 
notions of meanness in mechanic arts, as if they were unworthy of 
men of better families, should be borne down, and men of better con- 
dition as to birth or fortune engaged to be concerned in such occupa- 
tions. Sloth should be punished by temporary servitude at least. For- 
eign materials should be imported and even premiums given, when 
necessary, that all our own hands may be employed; and that, by ex- 
porting them again manufactured, we may obtain from abroad the 
price of our labours. Foreign manufactures and products ready for 
consumption should be made dear to the consumer by high duties, if 
we cannot altogether prohibit the consumption; that they may never 
be used by the lower and more numerous orders of the people whose 
consumption would be far greater than those of the few who are 
wealthy. Navigation, or the carriage of goods foreign or domestic, 
should be encouraged, as a gainful branch of business surpassing often 
all the profit made by the merchant. This too is a nursery of fit hands 
for defence at sea. 

“ ’Tis vain to allege that luxury and intemperance are necessary to 
the wealth of a state as they encourage all labour and manufactures 
by making a great consumption. It is plain there is no necessary vice 
in the consuming of the finest products or the wearing of the dearest 
manufactures by persons whose fortunes can allow it consistently with 
the duties of life. And what if men grew generally more frugal and 
abstemious in such things? more of these finer goods could be sent 
abroad; or if they could not, industry and wealth might be equally 
promoted by the greater consumption of goods less chargeable: as he 
who saves by abating of his own expensive splendour could by gener- 
ous ofiSces to his friends, and by some wise methods of charity to the 
poor, enable others to live so much better and make greater consump- 
tion than was made formerly by the luxury of one. , , . Unless there- 
fore a nation can be found where all men are already provided with 
all the necessaries and conveniencies of life abundantly, men may, 
without any luxury, make the very greatest consumption by plentiful 
provision for their children, by generosity and liberality to kinsmen 
and indigent men of worth, and by compassion to the distresses of the 
poor ” 

Under “Military skill and fortitude” Hutcheson discusses what 
Adam Smith afterwards placed under “Arms,” and decides in 
favour of a trained militia.'^^ 

'^System of Moral Philosophy, vol. ii., pp. 318-21. 
vol. ii., pp. 323-5. 



editor’s introduction 

In the same chapter he has a section with the marginal title 
‘^what taxes or tributes most eligible/’ which contains a repudia- 
tion of the policy of taxation for revenue only: — 

“As to taxes for defraying the public expenses, these are most con- 
venient which are laid on matters of luxury and splendour rather than 
the necessaries of life; on foreign products and manufactures rather 
than domestic; and such as can be easily raised without many expen- 
sive offices for collecting them. But above all, a just proportion to the 
wealth of people should be observed in whatever is raised from them, 
otherways than by duties upon foreign products and manufactures, 
for such duties are often necessary to encourage industry at home, 
though there were no public expenses.” ™ 

This proportionment of taxation to wealth he thinks cannot be 
attained except by means of periodical estimation of the wealth of 
families, since land taxes unduly oppress landlords in debt and let 
moneyed men go free, while duties and excises are paid by the 
consumer, so that ‘^hospitable generous men or such as have nu- 
merous families supported genteelly bear the chief burden here, 
and the solitary sordid miser bears little or no share of it.” 

It is quite clear from all this that Smith was largely influenced 
by the traditions of his chair in selecting his economic subjects. 
Dr. Scott draws attention to the curious fact that the very order in 
which the subjects happen to occur in Hutcheson’s System is al- 
most identical with the order in which the same subjects occur in 
Smith’s Lectures?^ We are strongly tempted to surmise that when 
Smith had hurriedly to prepare his lectures for Craigie’s class, he 
looked through his notes of his old master’s lectures (as hundreds 
of men in his position have done before and after him) and grouped 
the economic subjects together as an introduction and sequel to the 
lectures which he had brought with him from Edinburgh. Hutche- 
son was an inspiring teacher. His colleague, Leechman, says: — 

“As he had occasion every year in the course of his lectures to ex- 
plain the origin of government and compare the different forms of it, 
he took peculiar care, while on that subject, to inculcate the impor- 
tance of civil and religious liberty to the happiness of mankind: as a 
warm love of liberty and manly zeal for promoting it were ruling 
principles in his own breast, he always insisted upon it at great length 
and with the greatest strength of argument and earnestness of persua- 
sion: and he had such success on this important point, that few, if 
any, of his pupils, whatever contrary prejudices they might bring 

Ibid,, pp, 340-1. 

^System of Moral Philosophy, vol. ii, pp. 341-2. 

Francis Hutcheson, pp. 232-5. 



1 editor’s introduction 

along with them, ever left him without favourable notions of that side 
of the question which he espoused and defended ” 

Half a century later Adam Smith spoke of the Glasgow Chair of 
Moral Philosophy as an ‘^office to which the abilities and virtues 
of the never-to-be-forgotten Dr. Hutcheson had given a superior 
degree of illustration.” 

But while we may well believe that Adam Smith was influenced 
in the general direction of liberalism by Hutcheson, there seems 
no reason for attributing to Hutcheson’s influence the belief in the 
economic beneficence of self-interest which permeates the Wealth 
of Nations and has afforded a starting ground for economic specu- 
lation ever since. Hutcheson, as some of the passages just quoted 
show, was a mercantilist, and all the economic teaching in his Sys- 
tem is very dry hopes compared to Smith’s vigorous lectures on 
Cheapness or Plenty, with their often repeated denunciation of 
the ^^absurdity” of current opinions and the “pernicious regula- 
tions” to which they gave rise. Twenty years after attending his 
lectures, Adam Smith criticised Hutcheson expressly on the ground 
that he thought too little of self-love. In the chapter of the Theory 
of Moral Sentiments on the systems of philosophy which make vir- 
tue consist in benevolence, he says that Hutcheson believed that it 
was benevolence only which could stamp upon any action the 
character of virtue: the most benevolent action was that which 
aimed at the good of the largest number of people, and self-love 
was a principle which could never be virtuous, though it was inno- 
cent when it had no other effect than to make the individual take 
care of his own happiness. This “amiable system, a system which 
has a peculiar tendency to nourish and support in the human heart 
the noblest and the most agreeable of all affections,” Smith consid- 
ered to have the “defect of not sufficiently explaining from whence 
arises our approbation of the inferior virtues of prudence, vigi- 
lance, circumspection, temperance, constancy, firmness.” 

“Regard,” he continues, “to our own private happiness and interest 
too, appear upon many occasions very laudable principles of action. 
The habits of oeconomy, industry, discretion, attention and application 
of thought, are generally supposed to be cultivated from self-inter- 
ested motives, and at the same time are apprehended to be very 
praise-worthy qualities which deserve the esteem and approbation of 
every body. . . . Carelessness and want of oeconomy are universally 

®®In the preface to Hutcheson’s System of Moral Philosophy j pp. xxxv, 
xxxvi. 

^Rae, Life of Adam Smith, p. 411. 



editor’s introduction 

disapproved of, not, however, as proceeding from a want of benevo- 
lence, but from a want of the proper attention to the objects of self- 
interest.’^ ^ 

Adam Smith clearly believed that Hutcheson’s system did not 
give a sufficiently high place to self-interest. It was not Hutcheson 
that inspired his remark, “it is not from the benevolence of the 
butcher, the brewer or the baker that we expect our dinner, but 
from their regard to their own interest.” He may have obtained 
a general love of liberty from Hutcheson, but whence did he ob- 
tain the belief that self-interest works for the benefit of the whole 
economic community? He might possibly of course have evolved 
it entirely in his own mind without even hearing another lecture or 
reading another book after he left Hutcheson’s class. But it seems 
probable — ^we cannot safely say more — ^that he was assisted by 
his study of Mandeville, a writer who has had little justice done 
him in histories of economics, though McCulloch gives a useful 
hint on the subject in his Literature of Political Economy, In the 
chapter of the Moral Sentiments which follows the one which con- 
tains the criticism of Hutcheson just quoted, Smith deals with 
“Licentious Systems.” The appearances in human nature, he says, 
which seem at first sight to favour such systems were “slightly 
sketched out with the elegance and delicate precision of the duke 
of Rochefaucault, and afterwards more fully represented with the 
lively and humorous, though coarse and rustic eloquence of Dr. 
Mandeville.” «« 

Mandeville, he says, attributes all commendable acts to “a love 
of praise and commendation,” or “vanity,” and not content with 
that, endeavours to point out the imperfection of human virtue in 
many other respects. 

“Wherever our reserve with regard to pleasure falls short of the 
most ascetic abstinence, he treats it as gross luxury and sensuality. 
Every thing according to him, is luxury which exceeds what is abso- 
lutely necessary for the support of human nature, so that there is vice 
even in the use of a clean shirt or of a convenient habitation.” 

But, Smith thinks, he has fallen into the great fallacy of repre- 
senting every passion as wholly vicious if it is so in any degree and 
direction: — 

Moral Sentiments, 1759, PP- 464-6. 

Below, vol. i., p. 16. 

Moral Sentiments, 1759, p. 474. 

^ Ibid., 1759, P. 4S3. 



EDITOR^S INTRODUCTION 

‘It is thus that he treats everything as vanity which has any refer- 
ence either to what are or to what ought to be the sentiments of oth- 
ers: and it is by means of this sophistry that he establishes his fav- 
ourite conclusion that private vices are public benefits. If the love of 
magnificence, a taste for the elegant arts and improvements of human 
life, for whatever is agreeable in dress, furniture, or equipage, for 
architecture, statuary, painting and music, is to be regarded as luxury, 
sensuality and ostentation, even in those whose situation allows, with- 
out any inconveniency, the indulgence of those passions, it is certain 
that luxury, sensuality and ostentation are public benefits: since, with- 
out the qualities upon which he thinks proper to bestow such oppro- 
brious names, the arts of refinement could never find encouragement 
and must languish for want of employment.” 

‘^Such/’ Smith concludes, “is the system of Dr. Mandeville, 
which once made so much noise in the world.’’ However destruc- 
tive it might appear, he thought “it could never have imposed upon 
so great a number of persons, nor have occasioned so general an 
alarm among those who are friends of better principles, had it not 
in some respects bordered upon the truth.” 

Mandeville’s work originally consisted merely of a poem of 400 
lines called “The Grumbling Hive; or Knaves Turn’d Honest,” 
which according to his own account was first published as a six- 
penny pamphlet about 1705.^® In 1714 he reprinted it, appending 
a very much larger quantity of prose, under the title of The Fable 
of the Bees: or Private Vices, Public Benefits; with an Essay oii 
Charity and Charity Schools and a Search into the Nature of SocU 
ety. In 1729 he added further a second part, nearly as large as the 
first, consisting of a dialogue on the subject. The “grumbling hive,’' 
which is in reality a human society, is described in the poem as 
prospering greatly so long as it was full of vice: — 

“The worst of all the multitude 
Did something for the common good. 

This was the state’s craft, that maintain’d 
The whole, of which each part complain’d: 

This, as in musick harmony, 

Made jarrings in the main agree ; 

Parties directly opposite, 

Assist each oth’r, as ’twere for spight; 

And temp’rance with sobriety 
Serve drunkenness and gluttony. 

The root of evil, avarice, 

That damn’d ill-natur’d baneful vice, 

Was slave to prodigality, 


^ Ibid., p. 485. 

^ Moral Sentiments, 1759, p. 487. 
^ Fable of the Bees, 1714, preface. 



editor’s introduction 1“ 

That noble sin ; whilst luxury 
Employ’d a million of the poor, 

And odious pride a million more: 

Envy itself and vanity 
Were ministers of industry ; 

Their darling folly, fickleness 
In diet, furniture, and dress, 

That strange ridic’lous vice, was made 
The very wheel that turn’d the trade. 

Their laws and deaths were equally 
Objects of mutability; 

For what was well done for a time. 

In half a year became a crime ,* 

Yet whilst they altered thus their laws, 

Still finding and correcting flaws. 

They mended by inconstancy 
Faults which no prudence could foresee. 

Thus vice nursed ingenuity, 

Which join’d with time and industry. 

Had carry’d life’s conveniencies. 

It’s real pleasures, comforts, ease, 

To such a height, the very poor 
Lived better than the rich before; 

And nothing could be added more.” 

But the bees grumbled till Jove in anger swore he would rid the 
hive of fraud. The hive became virtuous, frugal and honest, and 
trade was forthwith ruined by the cessation of expenditure. At the 
end of the “Search into the Nature of Society’’ the author sums up 
his conclusion as follows: 

“After this I flatter myself to have demonstrated that neither the 
friendly qualities and kind affections that are natural to man, nor the 
real virtues he is capable of acquiring by reason and self-denial, are 
the foundation of society: but that what we call evil in the world, 
moral as well as natural, is the grand principle that makes us sociable 
creatures, the solid basis, the life and support of all trades and em- 
ployments without exception: that there we must look for the true 
origin of all arts and sciences, and that the moment evil ceases the 
society must be spoiled, if not totally dissolved.’' 

In a letter to the London Journal of loth August, 1723, which 
he reprinted in the edition of 1724, Mandeville defended this pas- 
sage vigorously against a hostile critic. If, he said, he had been 
writing to be understood by the meanest capacities, he would have 
explained that every want was an evil: — 

“That on the multiplicity of those wants depended all those mutual 
services which the individual members of a society pay to each other: 

®^Pp. 11-13 in the ed. of 1705. 

®®Pp. 427-8 in 2nd ed., 1723. 



liv editor’s introduction 

and that consequently, the greater variety there was of wants, the 
larger number of individuals might find their private interest in la- 
bouring for the good of others, and united together, compose one 
body.”*® 

If we bear in mind Smith’s criticism of Hutcheson and Mande- 
ville in adjoining chapters of the Moral Sentiments, and remember 
further that he must almost certainly have become acquainted 
with the Fable of the Bees when attending Hutcheson’s lectures or 
soon afterwards, we can scarcely fail to suspect that it was Man- 
deville who first made him realise that “it is not from the benevo- 
lence of the butcher, the brewer or the baker that we expect our 
dinner, but from their regard to their own interest.” Treating the 
word “vice” as a mistake for self-love, Adam Smith could have re- 
peated with cordiality Mandeville’s lines already quoted: — 

“Thus vice nursed ingenuity, 

Which join’d with time and industry, 

Had carry’d life’s conveniencies. 

It’s real pleasures, comforts, ease, 

To such a height, the very poor 
Lived better than the rich before.” 

Smith put the doggerel into prose, and added something from 
the Hutchesonian love of liberty when he propounded what is 
really the text of the polemical portion of the Wealth of Na- 
tions : — 

*‘The natural effort of every individual to better his own condition, 
when suffered to exert itself with freedom and security, is so power- 
ful a principle, that it is alone and without any assistance, not only 
capable of carrying on the society to wealth and prosperity, but of 
surmounting a hundred impertinent obstructions with which the folly 
of human laws too often incumbers its operations.” 

Experience shows that a general belief in the beneficence of the 
economic working of self-interest is not always sufficient to make 
even a person of more than average intelligence a free-trader. Con- 
sequently it would be rash to suppose that Smith’s disbelief in the 
mercantile system was merely the natural outcome of his general 
belief in economic freedom. Dugald Stewart’s quotations from his 
paper of 1755 do not contain anything to show that he was pour- 
ing contempt on the doctrine before he left Edinburgh and in his 
early years at Glasgow. It seems very likely that the reference in 
the lectures to Hume’s “essays showing the absurdity of these and 

*®P. 465 in ed. of 1724. 

Below, p. 508. 



editor’s introduction 

other such doctrines” is to be regarded as an acknowledgment 
of obligation, and therefore that it was Hume, by his Political Dis- 
courses on Money and the Balance of Trade in 1752, who first 
opened Adam Smith’s eyes on this subject. The probability of this 
is slightly increased by the fact that in the lectures the mercantile 
fallacies as to the balance of trade were discussed in connexion 
with Money, as in Hume’s Discourses, instead of in the position 
which they would have occupied if Smith had either followed 
Hutcheson’s order, or placed them among the causes of the “slow 
progress of opulence.” It is, too, perhaps, not a mere coincidence 
that while both Hume in the Discourses in 1752 and Smith in his 
lectures ten years later rejected altogether the aim of securing a 
favourable balance of trade, Hume still clearly believed in the 
utility of protection for home industries, and Smith is at any rate 
reported to have made a considerable concession in its favour.^® 

It would be useless to carry the inquiry into the origin of Adam 
Smith’s views any further here. Perhaps it has been carried too far 
already. In the course of the Wealth of Nations Smith actually 
quotes by their own name or that of their authors almost one hun- 
dred books. An attentive study of the notes to the present edition 
will convince the reader that though a few of these are quoted at 
second hand the number actually used was far greater. Usually but 
little, sometimes only a single fact, phrase or opinion, is taken from 
each, so that few authors are less open than Adam Smith to the 
reproach of having rifled another man’s work. That charge has in- 
deed never seriously been brought against him, except in regard to 
Turgot’s Riflexions, and in that case not a particle of evidence has 
ever been produced to show that he had used or even seen the book 
in question. The Wealth of Nations was not written hastily with 
the impressions of recent reading still vivid on the author’s brain. 
Its composition was spread over at least the twenty-seven years 
from 1749 to 1776. During that period economic ideas crossed and 
recrossed the Channel many times, and it is as useless as it is in- 
vidious to dispute about the relative shares of Great Britain and 
France in the progress effected. To go further and attempt to ap- 
portion the merit between different authors is like standing on 
some beach and discussing whether this or that particular wave 
had most to do with the rising tide. One wave may appear to have 

Lectures, p. 197. 

Above pp. XXXV, xxxviii. Moreover, before bringing out the second edition 
of his Discourses, Hume wrote to Adam Smith asking for suggestions. That 
Smith made no remark on the protectionist passage in the discourse on the 
Balance of Trade seems to be indicated by the fact that it remained un- 
altered (see Hume’s Essays, ed. Green & Grose, vol. i., pp. 59, 343 and 344). 



EDITOR^S INTRODUCTION 

what credit there is in sweeping over a child’s first sand castle and 
another wave may evidently wipe out his second, but both would 
have been swamped just as effectually, and almost as soon, on a 
perfectly calm day. 



AN INQUIRY INTO THE NATURE AND CAUSES 


OF THE 

WEALTH OF NATIONS 


INTRODUCTION AND PLAN OF THE WORK 

The annual ^ labour of every nation is the fund which originally 
supplies it with all the necessaries and conveniencies of life ^ which 
it annually consumes, and which consist always either in the im- 
mediate produce of that labour, or in what is purchased with that 
produce from other nations. 

According therefore, as this produce, or what is purchased with 
it, bears a greater or smaller proportion to the number of those who 
are to consume it, the nation will be better or worse supplied with 
all the necessaries and conveniencies for which it has occasion.^ 

But this proportion must in every nation be regulated by two 
different circumstances; first, by the skill, dexterity, and judgment 
with which its labour is generally applied; ^ and, secondly, by the 
proportion between the number of those who are employed in use- 
ful labour, and that of those who are not so employed.^ Whatever 
be the soil, climate, or extent of territory of any particular nation, 
the abundance or scantiness of its annusd supply must, in that par- 
ticular situation, depend upon those two circumstances. 

The abundance or scantiness of this supply too seems to depend 

^This word, with “annually” just below, at once marks the transition 
from the older British economists' ordinary practice of reprding the wealth 
of a nation as an accumulated fund. Following the physiocrats, Smith sees 
that the important thing is how much can be produced in a given time. 

^Cp. with this phrase Locke, Some Considerations of the Consequences 
of the Lowering of Interest and Raising the Value of Money, ed. of 1696, 
p. 66, “the intrinsic natural worth of anything consists in its fitness to sup- 
ply the necessities or serve the conveniencies of human life ” 

‘‘The implication that the nation's welfare is to be reckoned by the av- 
erage welfare of its members, not by the aggregate, is to be noticed. 

* Ed. I reads “with which labour is generally applied^ in it.” 

“ This second circumstance may be stretched so as to include the duration 
and intensity of the labour of those who are usefully employed, but an- 
other important circumstance, the quantity and quality of the accumulated 
instruments of production, is altogether omitted. 

Ivii 


The pro- 
duce of 
annual 
labour 
supplies 
annual 
consump- 
tion, 

better or 
worse ac- 
cording 
to the 
propor- 
tion of 
produce 
to people, 

which 
propor- 
tion is 
regulated 
by the 
skill, etc., 
of the 



Iviii 


labour 
and the 
propor- 
tion of 
useful 
labourers, 

and more 
by the 
sWll, etc., 
than by 
the pro- 
portion of 
useful 
labourers, 
as is 

shown by 
the great- 
er pro- 
duce of 
civilised 
societies. 


The 

causes of 
improve- 
ment and 
natural 
distribu- 
tion are 
the sub- 
ject of 
Book I. 

Capital 
stock, 
which 
regulates 
the pro- 
portion of 
useful 
labourers, 
is treated 
of in 
Book 11 . 


PLAN OF WORK 

4 

more upon the former of those two circumstances than upon the 
latter. Among the savage nations of hunters and fishers, every in- 
dividual who is able to work, is more or less employed in useful 
labour, and endeavours to provide, as well as he can, the necessa- 
ries and conveniences of life, for himself, or ^ such of his family or 
tribe as are either too old, or too young, or too infirm to go a hunt- 
ing and fishing. Such nations, however, are so miserably poor, that 
from mere want, they are frequently reduced, or, at least, think 
themselves reduced, to the necessity sometimes of directly destroy- 
ing, and sometimes of abandoning their infants, their old people, 
and those afflicted with lingering diseases, to perish with hunger, 
or to be devoured by wild beasts. Among civilized and thriving na- 
tions, on the contrary, though a great number of people do not la- 
bour at all, many of whom consume the produce of ten times, fre- 
quently of a hundred times more labour than the greater part of 
those who work; yet the produce of the whole labour of the so- 
ciety is so great, that all are often abundantly supplied, and a 
workman, even of the lowest and poorest order, if he is frugal and 
industrious, may enjoy a greater share of the necessaries and con- 
veniencies of life than it is possible for any savage to acquire. 

The causes ^ of this improvement, in the productive powers of 
labour, and the order, according to which its produce is naturally 
distributed ® among the different ranks and conditions of men in 
the society, make the subject of the First Book of this Inquiry, 

Whatever be the actual state of the skill, dexterity, and judg- 
ment with which labour is applied in any nation, the abundance or 
scantiness of its annual supply must depend, during the continu- 
ance of that state, upon the proportion between the number of 
those who are annually employed in useful labour, and that of 
those who are not so employed. The number of useful and produc- 
tive ® labourers, it will hereafter appear, is every where in propor- 
tion to the quantity of capital stock which is employed in setting 
them to work, and to the particular way in which it is so employed. 
The Second Book, therefore, treats of the nature of capital stock, 
of the manner in which it is gradually accumulated, and of the 
different quantities of labour which it puts into motion, according 
to the different ways in which it is employed. 

® Ed. I reads “and.”^ 

’ Only one cause, the division of labour, is actually treated, 

®For the physiocratic origin of the technical use of the terms “distribute'’ 
and “distribution,” see the Editor’s Introduction. 

® This word slips in here as an apparently unimportant synonym of “use- 
ful,” but subsequently ousts “useful” altogether, and is explained in such a 
way that unproductive labour may be useful; see esp. below p. 315, 



PLAN OF WORK 

Nations tolerably well advanced as to skill, dexterity, and judg- 
ment, in the application of labour, have followed very different 
plans in the general conduct or direction of it; and those plans 
have not all been equally favourable to the greatness of its prod- 
uce. The policy of some nations has given extraordinary encour- 
agement to the industry of the country; that of others to the in- 
dustry of towns. Scarce any nation has dealt equally and impar- 
tially with every sort of industry. Since the downfall of the Roman 
empire, the policy of Europe has been more favourable to arts, 
manufactures, and commerce, the industry of towns; than to ag- 
riculture, the industry of the country. The circumstances which 
seem to have introduced and established this policy are explained 
in the Third Book. 

Though those different plans were, perhaps, first introduced by 
the private interests and prejudices of particular orders of men, 
without any regard to, or foresight of, their consequences upon the 
general welfare of the society; yet they have given occasion to very 
different theories of political ceconomy; of which some magnify 
the importance of that industry which is carried on in towns, oth- 
ers of that which is carried on in the country. Those theories have 
had a considerable influence, not only upon the opinions of men of 
learning, but upon the public conduct of princes and sovereign 
states. I have endeavoured, in the Fourth Book, to explain, as fully 
and distinctly as I can, those different theories, and the principal 
effects which they have produced in different ages and nations. 

To explain in what has consisted the revenue of the great body 
of the people, or what has been the nature of those funds, which, 
in different ages and nations, have supplied their annual consump- 
tion, is the object of these Four first Books. The Fifth and last 
Book treats of the revenue of the sovereign, or commonwealth. In 
this book I have endeavoured to show; first, what are the necessary 
expences of the sovereign, or commonwealth; which of those ex- 
pences ought to be defrayed by the general contribution of the 
whole society; and which of them, by that of some particular part 
only, or of some particular members of it: secondly, what are 
the different methods in which the whole society may be made to 
contribute towards defraying the expences incumbent on the whole 
society, and what are the principal advantages and inconveniencies 

See the index fot the examples of the use of this term. 

Ed. I does not contain “to explain.” 

^“Ed. I reads “what is the nature.” 

^“Ed. I reads “is treated of in.” 

^*Ed. I reads “of the society.” 


The cir- 
cum- 
stances 
which led 
Europe to 
encourage 
the indus- 
try of the 
towns and 
discour- 
age agri- 
culture 
are dealt 
with in 
Book III. 


The 
theories 
to which 
different 
policies 
have 
given rise 
are ex- 
plained in 
Book IV. 


The ex- 
penditure, 
revenue 
and debts 
of the 
sovereign 
are 

treated of 
in Book 
V. 



lx 


PLAN OF WORK 


of each of those methods: and, thirdly and lastly, what are the 
reasons and causes which have induced almost all modern govern- 
ments to mortgage some part of this revenue, or to contract debts, 
and what have been the effects of those debts upon the real wealth, 
the annual produce of the land and labour of the society.^' 

Read in conjunction with the first two paragraphs, this sentence makes 
it clear that the wealth of a nation is to be reckoned by its per capita in- 
come. But this view is often temporarily departed from in the course of 
the work; see the index, sj;o. Wealth. 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 




# 


BOOK I 

Of the Causes of Improvement in the productive Powers of Labour, 
and of the Order according to which its Produce is naturally 
distributed among the different Ranks of the People, 


CHAPTER I 

OF THE DIVISION OF LABOUR ^ 

The greatest improvement ^ in the productive powers of labour, 
and the greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgment with 
which it is any where directed, or applied, seem to have been the 
effects of the division of labour. 

The effects of the division of labour, in the general business of 

^ This phrase, if used at all before this time, was not a familiar one. Its 
presence here is probably due to a passage in Mandeville, Fable of the Bees, 
pt. ii. (1729) dial, vi., p. 335: “Cleo. . . . when once men come to be gov- 
erned by written laws, all the rest comes on apace ... No number of men, 
when once they enjoy quiet, and no man needs to fear his neighbour, will 
be long without learning to divide and subdivide their labour. Hor. I don’t 
understand you, Cleo. Man, as I have hinted before, naturally loves to im- 
itate what he sees others do, which is the reason that savage people all do 
the same thing: this hinders them from meliorating their condition, though 
they are always wishing for it: but if one will wholly apply himself to the 
making of bows and arrows, whilst another provides food, a third builds 
huts, a fourth makes garments, and a fifth utensils, they not only become 
useful to one another, but the callings and employments themselves will, in 
the same number of years, receive much greater improvements, than if all 
had been promiscuously followed by every one of the five. Hor. I believe 
you are perfectly right there; and the truth of what you say is in nothing so 
conspicuous as it is in watch-making, which is come to a higher degree of 
perfection than it would have been arrived at yet, if the whole had always 
remained the employment of one person ; and I am persuaded that even the 
plenty we have of clocks and watches, as well as the exactness and beauty 
they may be made of, are chiefly owing to the division that has been made 
of that art into many branches.” The index contains, “Labour, The useful- 
ness of dividing and subdividing it.” Joseph Harris, Essay upon Money and 
Coins, 1757, pt. i., § 12, treats of the “usefulness of distinct trades,” or “the 
advantages accruing to mankind from their betaking themselves severally to 
different occupations,” but does not use the phrase “division of labour.” 

*Ed. I reads “improvements.” 


Division 
of labour 
is the 
great 
cause of 


3 



its in- 
creased 
powers, 
as may be 
better un- 
derstood 
from a 
particular 
example, 


such as 
pin-mak- 
ing. 


4 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

society, will be more easily understood, by considering in what 
manner it operates in some particular manufactures. It is com- 
monly supposed to be carried furthest in some very trifling ones; 
not perhaps that it really is carried further in them than in others 
of more importance: but in those trifling manufactures which are 
destined to supply the small wants of but a small number of peo- 
ple, the whole number of workmen must necessarily be small; and 
those employed in every different branch of the work can often be 
collected into the same workhouse, and placed at once under the 
view of the spectator. In those great manufactures, on the con- 
trary, which are destined to supply the great wants of the great 
body of the people, every different branch of the work employs so 
great a number of workmen, that it is impossible to collect them all 
into the same workhouse. We can seldom see more, at one time, 
than those employed in one single branch. Though in such manu- 
factures,^ therefore, the work may really be divided into a much 
greater number of parts, than in those of a more trifling nature, 
the division is not near so obvious, and has accordingly been much 
less observed. 

To take an example, therefore,^ from a very trifling manufac- 
ture; but one in which the division of labour has been very often 
taken notice of, the trade of the pin-maker; a workman not edu- 
cated to this business (which the division of labour has rendered a 
distinct trade),® nor acquainted with the use of the machinery em- 
ployed in it (to the invention of which the same division of labour 
has probably given occasion), could scarce, perhaps, with his ut- 
most industry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could not make 
twenty. But in the way in which this business is now carried on, 
not only the whole work is a peculiar trade, but it is divided into a 
number of branches, of which the greater part are likewise peculiar 
trades. One man draws out the wire, another straights it, a third 
cuts it, a fourth points it, a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving 
the head; to make the head requires two or three distinct opera- 
tions; to put it on, is a peculiar business, to whiten the pins is an- 
other; it is even a trade by itself to put them into the paper; and 
the important business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided 
into about eighteen distinct operations, which, in some manufacto- 

® Ed. I reads “Though in them.” 

* Another and perhaps more important reason for taking an example like 
that which follows is the possibility of exhibiting the advantages of ^vision 
of labour in statistical form. 

This parenthesis would alone be sufficient to show that those are wrong 
who believe Smith did not include the separation of employments in “divi- 
sion of labour.” 



5 


DIVISION OF LABOUR 

ries, are all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same 
man will sometimes perform two or three of them.® I have seen a 
small manufactory of this kind where ten men only were employed, 
and where some of them consequently performed two or three dis- 
tinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore but 
indifferently accommodated with the necessary machinery, they 
could, when they exerted themselves, make among them about 
twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound upwards of 
four thousand pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, 
could make among them upwards of forty-eight thousand pins in a 
day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth part of forty-eight 
thousand pins, might be considered as making four thousand eight 
hundred pins in a day. But if they had all wrought separately and 
independently, and without any of them having been educated to 
this peculiar business, they certainly could not each of them have 
made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day; that is, certainly, not 
the two hundred and fortieth, perhaps not the four thousand eight 
hundredth part of what they are at present capable of performing, 
in consequence of a proper division and combination of their dif- 
ferent operations. 

In every other art and manufacture, the effects of the division of The effect 
labour are similar to what they are in this very trifling one; though^ 
in many of them, the labour can neither be so much subdivided, nor trades 
reduced to so great a simplicity of operation. The division of labour, 
however, so far as it can be introduced, occasions, in every art, a vision of* 
proportionable increase of the productive powers of labour. The employ- 
separation of different trades and employments from one another, 
seems to have taken place, in consequence of this advantage. This 
separation too is generally carried furthest in those countries which 
enjoy the highest degree of industry and improvement; what is the 
work of one man in a rude state of society, being generally that of 
several in an improved one. In every improved society, the farmer 
is generally nothing but a farmer; the manufacturer, nothing but a 
manufacturer. The labour too which is necessary to produce any 
one complete manufacture, is almost always divided among a great 
number of hands. How many different trades are employed in each 
branch of the linen and woollen manufactures, from the growers of 

® In Adam Smith’s Lectures, p. 164, the business is, as here, divided inta 
eighteen operations This number is doubtless taken from the Encyclop&die, 
tom. V. (published in 1755), s,v. fipingle. The article is ascribed to M. De- 
laire, “qui decrivait la fabrication de P^pingle dans les ateliers meme des 
ouvriers,” p. 807 In some factories the division was carried further, E. 

Chambers, Cyclopcedia, vol. ii., 2nd ed., 1738, and 4th ed., 1741, s,v. Pin, 
makes the number of separate operations twenty-five. 



6 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


the flax and the wool, to the bleachers and smoothers of the linen, 
or to the dyers and dressers of the cloth! The nature of agriculture, 
indeed, does not admit of so many subdivisions of labour, nor of so 
complete a separation of one business from another, as manufac- 
tures. It is impossible to separate so entirely, the business of the 
grazier from that of the corn-farmer, as the trade of the carpenter 
is commonly separated from that of the smith. The spinner is al- 
most always a distinct person from the weaver; but the ploughman, 
the harrower, the sower of the seed, and the reaper of the corn, are 
often the same. The occasions for those different sorts of labour re- 
turning with the different seasons of the year, it is impossible that 
one man should be constantly employed in any one of them. This 
impossibility of making so complete and entire a separation of all 
the different branches of labour employed in agriculture, is perhaps 
the reason why the improvement of the productive powers of labour 
in this art, does not ^ways keep pace with their improvement in 
manufactures. The most opulent nations, indeed, generally excel all 
their neighbours in agriculture as well as in manufactures; but they 
are commonly more distinguished by their superiority in the latter 
than in the former. Their lands are in general better cultivated, and 
having more labour and expence bestowed upon them, produce 
more in proportion to the extent and natural fertility of the ground. 
But this ^ superiority of produce is seldom much more than in pro- 
portion to the superiority of labour and expence. In agriculture, the 
labour of the rich country is not always much more productive than 
that of the poor; or, at least, it is never so much more productive, as 
it commonly is in manufactures. The corn of the rich country, there- 
fore, will not always, in the same degree of goodness, come cheaper 
to market than that of the poor. The corn of Poland, in the same de- 
gree of goodness, is as cheap as that of France, notwithstanding the 
superior opulence and improvement of the latter country. The corn 
of France is, in the corn provinces, fully as good, and in most years 
nearly about the same price with the corn of England, though, in 
opulence and improvement, France is perhaps inferior to England. 
The corn-lands of England, however, are better cultivated than 
those of France, and the corn-lands ® of France are said to be much 
better cultivated than tnose of Poland. But though the poor coun- 
try, notwithstanding the inferiority of its cultivation, can, in some 
measure, rival the rich in the cheapness and goodness of its corn, it 
can pretend to no such competition in its manufactures; at least if 

" Ed. I reads “the.” 

^ Ed. I reads “the lands” here and in the line above. 



DIVISION OF LABOUR 7 

those manufactures suit the soil, climate, and situation of the rich 
country. The silks of France are better and cheaper than those of 
England, because the silk manufacture, at least under the present 
high duties upon the importation of raw silk, does not so well suit 
the climate of England as that of France.^ But the hard-ware and 
the coarse woollens of England are beyond all comparison superior 
to those of France, and much cheaper too in the same degree of 
goodness.^^ In Poland there are said to be scarce any manufactures 
of any kind, a few of those coarser household manufactures except- 
ed, without which no country can well subsist. 

This great increase of the quantity of work, which, in conse- 
quence of the division of labour, the same number of people are cap- 
able of performing,^^ is owing to three different circumstances; first, 
to the increase of dexterity in every particular workman; secondly, 
to the saving of the time which is commonly lost in passing from 
one species of work to another; and lastly, to the invention of a 
great number of machines which facilitate and abridge labour, and 
enable one man to do the work of many.^^ 

First, the improvement of the dexterity of the workman necessar- 
ily increases the quantity of the work he can perform; and the divi- 
sion of labour, by reducing every man’s business to some one simple 
operation, and by making this operation the sole employment of his 
life, necessarily increases very much the dexterity of the workman. 
A common smith, who, though accustomed to handle the hammer, 
has never been used to make nails, if upon some particular occasion 
he is obliged to attempt it, will scarce, I am assured, be able to make 
above two or three hundred nails in a day, and those too very bad 

®Ed. I reads “because the silk manufacture does not suit the climate of 
England” 

^®In Lectures, p. 164, the comparison is between English and French 
“toys,” ie., small metal articles. 

^^Ed. I places “in consequence of the division of labour” here instead of 
in the line above, 

““Pour la c 616 rit 6 du travail et la perfection de I’ouvrage, elles depend- 
ent enticement de la multitude des ouvriers rassembles. Lorsqu’une manu- 
facture est nombreuse, chaque operation occupe un homme dif£6rent. Tel 
ouvrier ne fait et ne fera de sa vie qu’une seule et unique chose; tel autre 
une autre chose: d'ou il arrive que chacune s’exCute bien et promptement, 
et que Touvrage le mieux fait est encore celui qu’on a k meilleur march6. 
D’ailleurs le goht et la fa^on se perfectionnent necessairement entre un grand 
nombre d’ouvriers, parce qu’il est difficile qu’il ne s’en rencontre quelques- 
uns capables de refiChir, de combiner, et de trouver enfin le seul moyen qui 
puisse les mcttre audessus de leurs semblables; le moyen ou d’epargner la 
matiCe, ou d’allonger le temps, ou de surfaire lindustrie, soit par une ma- 
chine nouvelle, soit par une manoeuvre plus conmodp.^^’—Encyclopidie, tom 
i. (1751), p. 717, s.v. Art. All three advantages mentioned in the text above 
are included here. 


The ad- 
vantage is 
due to 
three dr. 
cum- 
stances, 


(i) im- 
proved 
dexterity. 



(2) sav- 

i^of 

time. 


S THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ones.^^ A smith who has been accustomed to make nails, but whose 
sole or principal business has not been that of a nailer, can seldom 
with his utmost diligence make more than eight hundred or a thous- 
and nails in a day. I have seen several boys under twenty years of 
age who had never exercised any other trade but that of making 
nails, and who, when they exerted themselves, could make, each of 
them, upwards of two thousand three hundred nails in a day.^"^ The 
making of a nail, however, is by no means one of the simplest opera- 
tions. The same person blows the bellows, stirs or mends the fire as 
there is occasion, heats the iron, and forges every part of the nail: 
In forging the head too he is obliged to change his tools. The differ- 
ent operations into which the making of a pin, or of a metal but- 
ton,^® is subdivided, are all of them much more simple, and the dex- 
terity of the person, of whose life it has been the sole business to 
perform them, is usually much greater. The rapidity with which 
some of the operations of those manufactures are performed, ex- 
ceeds what the human hand could, by those who had never seen 
them, be supposed capable of acquiring. 

Secondly, the advantage which is gained by saving the time com- 
monly lost in passing from one sort of work to another, is much 
greater than we should at first view be apt to imagine it. It is impos- 
sible to pass very quickly from one kind of work to another, that is 
carried on in a different place, and with quite different tools. A 
country weaver,^® who cultivates a small farm, must lose a good 
deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and from the field 
to his loom. When the two trades can be carried on in the same 
workhouse, the loss of time is no doubt much less. It is even in this 
case, however, very considerable. A man commonly saunters a little 
in turning his hand from one sort of employment to another. When 
he first begins the new work he is seldom very keen and hearty; his 
mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for some time he rather tri- 
fles than applies to good purpose. The habit of sauntering and of in- 
dolent careless application, which is naturally, or rather necessarily 
acquired by every country workman who is obliged to change his 
work and his tools every half hour, and to apply his hand in twenty 
different ways almost every day of his life; renders him almost al- 
ways slothful and lazy, and incapable of any vigorous application 

“In Lectures, p. i66, “a country smith not accustomed to make nails will 
work very hard for three or four hundred a day and those too very bad,” 

“ In Lectures, p. i66, “a boy used to it will easily make two thousand and 
those incomparably better” 

“ In Lectures, p. 255, it is implied that the labour of making a button was 
divided among eighty persons. 

“The same example occurs in Lectures, p. 166. 



DIVISION OF LABOUR 9 

even on the most pressing occasions. Independent, therefore, of his 
deficiency in point of dexterity, this cause alone must always reduce 
considerably the quantity of work which he is capable of perform- 
ing. 

Thirdly, and lastly, every body must be sensible how much la- 
bour is facilitated and abridged by the application of proper ma- 
chinery. It is unnecessary to give any example.^^ I shall only ob- 
serve, therefore,^® that the invention of all those machines by which 
labour is so much facilitated and abridged, seems to have been orig- 
inally owing to the division of labour. Men are much more likely to 
discover easier and readier methods of attaining any object, when 
the whole attention of their minds is directed towards that single 
object, than when it is dissipated among a great variety of things. 
But in consequence of the division of labour, the whole of every 
man’s attention comes naturally to be directed towards some one 
very simple object. It is naturily to be expected, therefore, that 
some one or other of those who are employed in each particular 
branch of labour should soon find out easier and readier methods of 
performing their own particular work, wherever the nature of it ad- 
mits of such improvement. A great part of the machines made use 
of in those manufactures in which labour is most subdivided, 
were originally the inventions of common workmen, who, being each 
of them employed in some very simple operation, naturally turned 
their thoughts towards finding out easier and readier methods of 
performing it. Whoever has been much accustomed to visit such 
manufactures, must frequently have been shewn very pretty ma- 
chines, which were the inventions of such workmen, in order to 
facilitate and quicken their own particular part of the work. In the 
first fire-engines,^^ a boy was constantly employed to open and shut 
alternately the communication between the boiler and the cylinder, 
according as the piston either ascended or descended. One of those 
boys, who loved to play with his companions, observed that, by ty- 
ing a string from the handle of the valve which opened this com- 
munication to another part of the machine, the valve would open 
and shut without his assistance, and leave him at liberty to divert 
himself with his play-fellows. One of the greatest improvements 
that has been made upon this machine, since it was first invented. 


Examples are given in Lectures, p. 167; “Two men and three horses will 
do more in a day with the plough than twenty men without it. The miller 
and his servant will do more with the water mill than a dozen with the hand 
mill, though it too be a machine ” 

Ed. I reads “I shall, therefore, only observe.” 

Ed. I reads “machines employed.” ^ Ed. i reads “of common.” 

I e., steam-engines. 


and (3) 
applica- 
tion of 
machin- 
ery, 

invented 
by work- 
men, 



or by ma- 
chine- 
makers 
and philo- 
sophers. 


THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

was in this manner the discovery of a boy who wanted to save his 
own labour.^^ 

All the improvements in machinery, however, have by no means 
been the inventions of those who had occasion to use the machines. 
Many improvements have been made by the ingenuity of the mak- 
ers of the machines, when to make them became the business of a 
peculiar trade; and some by that of those who are called philoso- 
phers or men of speculation, whose trade it is not to do any thing, 
but to observe every thing; and who, upon that account, are often 
capable of combining together the powers of the most distant and 
dissimilar objects.^® In the progress of society, philosophy or spec- 
ulation becomes, like every other employment, the principal or sole 
trade and occupation of a particular class of citizens. Like every 
other employment too, it is subdivided into a great number of dif- 
ferent branches, each of which affords occupation to a peculiar tribe 
or class of philosophers; and this subdivision of employment in 
philosophy, as well as in every other business, improves dexterity, 
and saves time. Each individual becomes more expert in his own pe- 
culiar branch, more work is done upon the whole, and the quantity 
of science is considerably increased by it.^^ 

^ This pretty story is largely, at any rate, mythical. It appears to have 
grown out of a misreading (not necessarily by Smith) of the following pas- 
sage: ‘‘They used before to work with a buoy in the cylinder enclosed in a 
pipe, which buoy rose when the steam was strong, and opened the injection, 
and made a stroke; thereby they were capable of only giving six, eight or 
ten strokes in a minute, till a boy, Humphry Potter, who attended the en- 
gine, added (what he called scoggan) a catch that the beam Q always 
opened; and then it would go fifteen or sixteen strokes in a minute. But this 
being perplexed with catches and strings, Mr. Henry Beighton, in an engine 
he had built at Newcastle-on-Tyne in 1718, took them all away, the beam 
itself simply supplying all much better.”—}. T. Desaguliers, Course of Ex- 
perimental Philosophy, vol. ii., 1744, p. 533. From pp. 469, 471, it appears 
that hand labour was originally used before the “buoy” was devised. 

“ In Lectures, p. 167, the invention of the plough is conjecturally attrib- 
uted to a farmer and that of the hand-mill to a slave, while the invention of 
the water-wheel and the steam engine is credited to philosophers. Mandc- 
viHe is very much less favourable to the claims of the philosophers: “They 
are veiy seldom the same sort of people, those that invent arts and improve- 
ments in them and those that inquire into the reason of things: this latter is 
most commonly practised by such as are idle and indolent, that are fond of 
retirement, hate business and take delight in speculation; whereas none suc- 
ceed oftener in the first than active, stirring and laborious men, such as will 
put their hand to the plough, try experiments and give all their attention to 
what they are about.”— Fable of the Bees, pt. ii. (1729), dial, iii., p. 151. He 
goes on to give as examples the improvements in soap-boiling, grain-dyeing, 
etc. 

®^The advantage of producing particular commodities wholly or chiefly in 
the countries most naturally fitted for their production is recognised below, 
p. 425, but the fact that div^on of labour is necessary for its attainment is 
not noticed. The fact that division of labour allows different workers to be 



DIVISION OF LABOUR 

It is the great multiplication of the productions of all the differ- 
ent arts, in consequei ce of the division of labour, which occasions, 
in a well-governed society, that universal opulence which extends 
itself to the lowest ranks of the people. Every workman has a great 
quantity of his own work to dispose of beyond what he himself has 
occasion for; and every other workman being exactly in the same 
situation, he is enabled to exchange a great quantity of his own 
goods for a great quantity, or, what comes to the same thing, for the 
price of a great quantity of theirs. He supplies them abundantly 
with what they have occasion for, and they accommodate him as 
amply with what he has occasion for, and a general plenty diffuses 
itself through all the different ranks of the society. 

Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or day- 
labourer in a civilized and thriving country, and you will perceive 
that the number of people of whose industry a part, though but a 
small part, has been employed in procuring him this accommoda- 
tion, exceeds all computation. The woollen coat, for example, which 
covers the day-labourer, as coarse and rough as it may appear, is 
the produce of the joint labour of a great multitude of workmen. 
The shepherd, the sorter of the wool, the wool-comber or carder, the 
dyer, the scribbler, the spinner, the weaver, the fuller, the dresser, 
with many others, must ^1 join their different arts in order to com- 
plete even this homely production. How many merchants and car- 
riers, besides, must have been employed in transporting the mate- 
rials from some of those workmen to others who often live in a very 
distant part of the country! how much commerce and navigation in 
particular, how many ship-builders, sailors, sail-makers, rope-mak- 
ers, must have been employed in order to bring together the differ- 
ent drugs made use of by the dyer, which often come from the re- 
motest corners of the world! What a variety of labour too is neces- 
sary in order to produce the tools of the meanest of those workmen! 
To say nothing of such complicated machines as the ship of the 
sailor, the mill of the fuller, or even the loom of the weaver, let us 
consider only what a variety of labour is requisite in order to form 
that very simple machine, the shears with which the shepherd clips 
the wool. The miner, the builder of the furnace for smelting the ore, 
the feller of the timber, the burner of the charcoal to be made use of 
in the smelting-house, the brick-maker, the brick-layer, the work- 
men who attend the furnace, the mill-wright, the forger, the smith, 

put exclusively to the kind of work for which they are best fitted by quali- 
ties not acquired by education and practice, such as age, sex, size and strength, 
is in part ignored and in part denied below, pp. 13, 16. The disadvantage of 
division of labour or specialisation is dealt with below, pp. 734-736* 


Hence the 

universal 

opulence 

of a well- 

governed 

society, 


even the 
day-la- 
bourer’s 
coat being 
the pro- 
duce of a 
vast num- 
ber of 
workmen. 



12 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


must all of them join their different arts in order to produce them. 
Were we to examine, in the same manner, all the different parts of 
his dress and household furniture, the coarse linen shirt which he 
wears next his skin, the shoes which cover his feet, the bed which he 
lies on, and all the different parts which compose it, the kitchen- 
grate at which he prepares his victuals, the coals which he makes 
use of for that purpose, dug from the bowels of the earth, and 
brought to him perhaps by a long sea and a long land carriage, all 
the other utensils of his kitchen, all the furniture of his table, the 
knives and forks, the earthen or pewter plates upon which he serves 
up and divides his victuals, the different hands employed in prepar- 
ing his bread and his beer, the glass window which lets in the heat 
and the light, and keeps out the wind and the rain, with all the 
knowledge and art requisite for preparing that beautiful and happy 
invention, without which these northern parts of the world could 
scarce have afforded a very comfortable habitation, together with 
the tools of all the different workmen employed in producing those 
different conveniences ; if we examine, I say, all these things, and 
consider what a variety of labour is employed about each of them, 
we shall be sensible that without the assistance and co-operation of 
many thousands, the very meanest person in a civilized country 
could not be provided, even according to, what we very falsely ima- 
gine, the easy and simple manner in which he is commonly accom- 
modated. Compared, indeed, with the more extravagant luxury of 
the great, his accommodation must no doubt appear extremely sim- 
ple and easy; and yet it may be true, perhaps, that the accommoda- 
tion of an European prince does not always so much exceed that of 
an industrious and frugal peasant, as the accommodation of the lat- 
ter exceeds that of many an African king, the absolute master of the 
lives and liberties of ten thousand naked savages.^'*^ 

®This paragraph was probably taken bodily from the MS. of the auth- 
or^s lectures. It appears to be founded on Mun, England's Treasure by For- 
raign Trade, chap, iii., at end; Locke, Civil Government, 43; Mandeville, 
Fable of the Bees, pt. i., Remark P, 2nd ed., 1723, p. 182, and perhaps Har- 
ris, Essay upon Money and Coins, pt. i., § 12. See Lectures, pp. 161-162 and 
notes. 



CHAPTER II 


OF THE PRINCIPLE WHICH GIVES OCCASION TO THE DIVISION 
OF LABOUR 

This division of labour, from which so many advantages are de- 
rived, is not originally the effect of any human wisdom, which fore- 
sees and intends that general opulence to which it gives occasion."*- 
It is the necessary, though very slow and gradual, consequence of a 
certain propensity in human nature which has in view no such ex- 
tensive utility; the propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one 
thing for another. 

Whether this propensity be one of those original principles in hu- 
man nature, of which no further account can be given; or whether, 
as seems more probable, it be the necessary consequence of the fac- 
ulties of reason and speech, it belongs not to our present subject to 
enquire. It is common to all men, and to be found in no other race 
of animals, which seem to know neither this nor any other species of 
contracts. Two greyhounds, in running down the same hare, have 
sometimes the appearance of acting in some sort of concert. Each 
turns her towards his companion, or endeavours to intercept her 
when his companion turns her towards himself. This, however, is 
not the effect of any contract, but of the accidental concurrence of 
their passions in the same object at that particular time. Nobody 
ever saw a dog make a fair and deliberate exchange of one bone for 
another with another dog.^ Nobody ever saw one animal by its ges- 
tures and natural cries signify to another, this is mine, that yours; 
I am willing to give this for that. When an animal wants to obtain 
something either of a man or of another animal, it has no other 
means of persuasion but to gain the favour of those whose service it 

it is not the effect of any conscious regulation by the state or society, 
like the “law of Sesostris,” that every man should follow the employment of 
his father, referred to in the corresponding passage in Lectures, p. i68. The 
denial that it is the effect of individual wisdom recognismg the advantage of 
exercising special natural talents comes lower down, p. 15. 

® It is by no means clear what object there could be in exchanging one bone 
for another. 


Thedivi- 
sion of la- 
bour 
arises 
from a 
propen- 
sity in 
human 
nature to 
exchange. 

This pro- 
pensity Is 
found in 
man 
alone. 


13 



14 THE WEALTH^ OF NATIONS 

requires. A puppy fawns upon its dam, and a spaniel endeavours by 
a thousand attractions to engage the attention of its master who is 
at dinner, when it wants to be fed by him. Man sometimes uses the 
same arts with his brethren, and when he has no other means of en- 
gaging them to act according to his inclinations, endeavours by 
every servile and fawning attention to obtain their good will. He 
has not time, however, to do this upon every occasion. In civilized 
society he stands at all times in need of the co-operation and assist- 
ance of great multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to 
gain the friendship of a few persons. In almost every other race of 
animals each individual, when it is grown up to maturity, is entire- 
ly ^ independent, and in its natural state has occasion for the assist- 
ance of no other living creature. But man has almost constant occa- 
sion for the help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to expect it 
from their benevolence only. He will be more likely to prevail if he 
can interest their self-love in his favour, and shew them that it is for 
their own advantage to do for him what he requires of them. Who- 
ever offers to another a bargain of any kind, proposes to do this. 
Give me that which I want, and you shall have this which you want, 
is the meaning of every such offer; and it is in this manner that we 
obtain from one another the far greater part of those good offices 
which we stand in need of. It is not from the benevolence of the 
butcher, the brewer, or the baker, that we expect our dinner, but 
from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to 
their humanity but to their self-love, and never talk to them of 
our own necessities but of their advantages. Nobody but a beggar 
chuses to depend chiefly upon the benevolence of his fellow-citizens. 
Even a beggar does not depend upon it entirely. The charity of 
well-disposed people, indeed, supplies him with the whole fund of 
his subsistence. But though this principle ultimately provides him 
with all the necessaries of life which he has occasion for, it neither 
does nor can provide him with them as he has occasion for them. 
The greater part of his occasional wants are supplied in the same 
manner as those of other people, by treaty, by barter, and by pur- 
chase. With the money which one man gives him he purchases food. 
The old cloaths which another bestows upon him he exchanges for 
other old cloaths which suit him better, or for lodging, or for food, 
or for money, with which he can buy either food, cloaths, or lodg- 
ing, as he has occasion.^ 

® Misprinted ‘‘intirely’^ in eds. 1-5. “Entirely” occurs a little lower down 
in all eds. 

*The paragraph is repeated from Lectures, p. 169. It is founded on Mande- 
viUe, Fable of the Bees, pt. ii. (1729), dial, vi., pp. 421, 422. 



ORIGIN OF DIVISION OF LABOUR ^5 

As it is by treaty, by barter, and by purchase, that we obtain 
from one another the greater part of those mutual good offices 
which we stand in need of, so it is this same trucking disposition 
which originally gives occasion to the division of labour. In a tribe 
of hunters or shepherds a particular person makes bows and arrows, 
for example, with more readiness and dexterity than any other. He 
frequently exchanges them for cattle or for venison with his com- 
panions; and he finds at last that he can in this manner get more 
cattle and venison, than if he himself went to the field to catch 
them. From a regard to his own interest, therefore, the making of 
bows and arrows grows to be his chief business, and he becomes a 
sort of armourer. Another excels in making the frames and covers 
of their little huts or moveable houses. He is accustomed to be of 
use in this way to his neighbours, who reward him in the same man- 
ner with cattle and with venison, till at last he finds it his interest to 
dedicate himself entirely to this emplo3nnent, and to become a sort 
of house-carpenter. In the same manner a third becomes a smith or 
a brazier; a fourth a tanner or dresser of hides or skins, the princi- 
pal part of the clothing of savages. And thus the certainty of being 
able to exchange all that surplus part of the produce of his own 
labour, which is over and above his own consumption, for such 
parts of the produce of other men’s labour as he may have occasion 
for, encourages every man to apply himself to a particular occupa- 
tion, and to cultivate and bring to perfection whatever talent or 
genius he may possess for that particular species of business.® 

The difference of natural talents in different men is, in reality, 
much less than we are aware of; and the very different genius which 
appears to distinguish men of different professions, when grown up 
to maturity, is not upon many occasions so much the cause, as the 
effect of the division of labour.® The difference between the most 
dissimilar characters, between a philosopher and a common street 
porter, for example, seems to arise not so much from nature, as 
from habit, custom, and education. When they came into the world, 
and for the first six or eight years of their existence, they were, per- 
haps,*^ very much alike, and neither their parents nor playfellows 
could perceive any remarkable difference. About that age, or soon 
after, they come to be employed in very different occupations. The 

^Lectures, pp. 169-170. 

® This is apparently directed against Harris, Money and Coins, pt. i., § ii, 
and is in accordance with the view of Hume, who asks readers to “consider 
how nearly equal all men are in their bodily force, and even in their mental 
powers and faculties, ere cultivated by education.”--“Of the Original Con- 
tract,” in Essays, Moral and Political, 1748, p. 291. 

“Perhaps” is omitted in eds. 2 and 3, and restored in the errata to ed. 4. 


It is en- 
couraged 
by self-in- 
terest and 
leads to 
division of 
labour. 


thus giv- 
ing rise to 
differences 
of talent 
more im- 
portant 
than the 
natural 
differ- 
ences, 



aiKi ren- 
dering 
those dif- 
ferences 
useful 


XH^; WEALTH OF NATIONS 

difference of talents comes then to be taken notice of, and widens 
by degrees, till at last the vanity of the philosopher is willing to 
acknowledge scarce any resemblance. But without the disposition 
to truck, barter, and exchange, every man must have procured to 
himself every necessary and conveniency of life which he wanted. 
All must have had the same duties to perform, and the same work 
to do, and there could have been no such difference of employment 
as could alone give occasion to any great difference of talents.^ 

As it is this disposition which forms that difference of talents, so 
remarkable among men of different professions, so it is this same 
disposition which renders that difference useful. Many tribes of an- 
imals acknowledged to be all of the same species, derive from na- 
ture a much more remarkable distinction of genius, than what, an- 
tecedent to custom and education, appears to take place among 
men. By nature a philosopher is not in genius and disposition half 
so different from a street porter, as a mastiff is from a greyhound, or 
a greyhound from a spaniel, or this last from a shepherd’s dog. 
Those different tribes of animals, however, though all of the same 
species, are of scarce any use to one another. The strength of the 
mastiff is not in the least supported either by the swiftness of the 
greyhound, or by the sagacity of the spaniel, or by the docility of 
the shepherd’s dog. The effects of those different geniuses and tal- 
ents, for want of the power or disposition to barter and exchange, 
cannot be brought into a common stock, and do not in the least 
contribute to the better accommodation and conveniency of the 
species. Each animal is still obliged to support and defend itself, 
separately and independently, and derives no sort of advantage 
from that variety of talents with which nature has distinguished its 
fellows. Among men, on the contrary, the most dissimilar geniuses 
are of use to one another; the different produces of their respective 
taleiits, by the general disposition to truck, barter, and exchange, 
being brought, as it were, into a common stock, where every man 
may purchase whatever part of the produce of other men’s talents 
he has occasion for. 

^ Lectures f pp, 170-171. 


« 



CHAPTER III 


THAT THE DIVISION OF LABOUR IS LIMITED BY THE EXTENT OF 
THE MARKET 

As it is the power of exchanging that gives occasion to the division 
of labour, so the extent of this division must always be limited by 
the extent of that power, or, in other words, by the extent of the 
market. When the market is very small, no person can have any en- 
couragement to dedicate himself entirely to one employment, for 
want of the power to exchange all that surplus part of the produce 
of his own labour, which is over and above his own consumption, 
for such parts of the produce of other men’s labour as he has occa- 
sion for. 

There are some sorts of industry, even of the lowest kind, which 
can be carried on no where but in a great town. A porter, for ex- 
ample, can find employment and subsistence in no other place. A 
village is by much too narrow a sphere for him; even an ordinary 
market town is scarce large enough to afford him constant occupa- 
tion. In the lone houses and very small villages which are scattered 
about in so desert a country as the Highlands of Scotland, every 
farmer must be butcher, baker and brewer for his own family. In 
such situations we can scarce expect to find even a smith, a carpen- 
ter, or a mason, within less than twenty miles of another of the 
same trade. The scattered families that live at eight or ten miles 
distance from the nearest of them, must learn to perform themselves 
a great number of little pieces of work, for which, in more populous 
countries, they would call in the assistance of those workmen. 
Country workmen are almost every where obliged to apply them- 
selves to all the different branches of industry that have so much 
affinity to one another as to be employed about the same sort of ma- 
terials. A country carpenter deals in every sort of work that is made 
of wood: a country smith in every sort of work that is made of iron. 
The former is not only a carpenter, but a joiner, a cabinet maker, 
and even a carver in wood, as well as a wheelwright, a ploughwright, 
a cart and waggon maker. The employments of the latter are still 

17 


Division 
of labour 
is limited 
by the ex- 
tent of the 
power of 
exchang- 
ing. 


Various 
trades 
cannot be 
carried on 
except in 
towns. 



Water- 
carriage 
widens 
the mar- 
ket, 


IS the wealth.of nations 

more varioul It is impossible there should be such a trade as even 
that of a nailer in the remote and inland parts of the Highlands of 
Scotland. Such a workman at the rate of a thousand nails a day, and 
three hundred working days in the year, will make three hundred 
thousand nails in the year. But in such a situation it would be im- 
possible to dispose of one thousand, that is, of one day’s work in the 
year. 

As by means of water-carriage a more extensive market is opened 
to every sort of industry than what land-carriage alone can afford 
it, so it is upon the sea-coast, and along the banks of navigable riv- 
ers, that industry of every kind naturally begins to subdivide and 
improve itself, and it is frequently not till a long time after that 
those improvements extend themselves to the inland parts of the 
country. A broad-wheeled waggon, attended by two men, and 
drawn by eight horses, in about six weeks time carries and brings 
back between London and Edinburgh near four ton weight of goods. 
In about the same time a ship navigated by six or eight men, and 
sailing between the ports of London and Leith, frequently carries 
and brings back two hundred ton weight of goods. Six or eight men, 
therefore, by the help of water-carriage, can carry and bring back 
in the same time the same quantity of goods between London and 
Edinburgh, as fifty broad-wheeled waggons, attended by a hundred 
men, and drawn by four hundred horses^ Upon two hundred tons 
of goods, therefore, carried by the cheapest land-carriage from Lon- 
don to Edinburgh, there must be charged the maintenance of a 
hundred men for three weeks, and both the maintenance, and, 
what is nearly equal to the maintenance, the wear and tear of four 
hundred horses as well as of fifty great waggons. Whereas, upon the 
same quantity of goods carried by water, there is to be charged only 
the maintenance of six or eight men, and the wear and tear of a ship 
of two hundred tons burthen, together with the value of the supe- 
rior risk, or the difference of the insurance between land and water- 
carriage. Were there no other communication between those two 
places, therefore, but by land-carriage, as no goods could be trans- 
ported from the one to the other, except such whose price was very 
considerable in proportion to their weight, they could carry on but 
a small part of that commerce which at present subsists ^ between 
them, and consequently could give but a small part of that encour- 

^ The superiority of carriage by sea is here considerably less than in Lee- 
tures, p. 172, but is still probably exaggerated. W. Playfair, ed. of Wealth of 
Nations, 1805, vol. i., p. 29, says a waggon of the kind described could carry 
eight tons, but, of course, some allowance must be made for thirty years of 
road improvement. 

® Ed. I reads “which is at present carried on.” 



19 


LIMIT OF DIVISION OF LABOUR 

agement which they at present mutually afford to each other’s in- 
dustry. There could be little or no commerce of any kind between 
the distant parts of the world. What goods could bear the expence 
of land-carriage between London and Calcutta? ^ Or if there were ^ 
any so precious as to be able to support this expence, with what 
safety could they be transported through the territories of so many 
barbarous nations? Those two cities, however, at present carry on a 
very considerable commerce with each other,^ and by mutually af- 
fording a market, give a good deal of encouragement to each other’s 
industry. 

Since such, therefore, are the advantages of water-carriage, it is and so the 
natural that the first improvements of art and industry should be 
made where this conveniency opens the whole world for a market to ^ents are 

the produce of every sort of labour, and that they should always be on the 

much later in extending themselves into the inland parts of the 
country. The inland parts of the country can for a long time have gable 
no other market for the greater part of their goods, but the country elvers, 
which lies round about them, and separates them from the sea- 
coast, and the great navigable rivers. The extent of their market, 
therefore, must for a long time be in proportion to the riches and 
populousness of that country, and consequently thfeirdmproveinent 
must always be posterior to the improvement of that country. In 
our North American colonies the plantations have constantly fol- 
lowed either the sea-coast or the banks of navijgable rivers, and have 
scarce any where extended themselves to any considerable distance 
from both. 

The nations that, according to the best authenticated history, ap- for ex- 
pear to have been first civilized, were those that dwelt round the 
coast of the Mediterranean sea. That sea, by far the greatest inlet thean- 
that is known in the world, having no tides, nor consequently any cient na- 
waves except such as are caused by the wind only,^ was, by the 
smoothness of its surface, as well as by the multitude of its islands, terranean 
and the proximity of its neighbouring shores, extremely favourable ' 

to the infant navigation of the world; when, from their ignorance nf 
the compass, men were afraid to quit the view of the coast; and from 
the imperfection of the art of ship-building, to abandon themselves 
to the boisterous waves of the ocean. To pass beyond the pillars of 
Hercules, that is, to sail out of the Streights of Gibraltar, was, in 

® Playfair, op. dt., p. 30, says that equalising the out and home voyages 
goods were carried from London to Calcutta by sea at the same price (12s 
per cwt.) as from London to Leeds by land. 

^ Ed. I reads “was.” 

® Ed. I reads “carry on together a very considerable commerce.” 

® This shows a curious belief in the wave-producing capacity of the tides. 



Improve- 
ments 
first took 
place in 
Egypt, 


Bengal 

and 

China; 


while Af- 
rica, Tar- 
tary and 
Siberia, 
and also 
Bavaria, 
Austria 
and Hun- 
gary are 
backward. 


20 the wealth of nations 

the antient world, long considered as a most wonderful and danger- 
ous exploit of navigation. It was late before even the Phenicians and 
Carthaginians, the most skilful navigators and ship-builders of 
those old times, attempted it, and they were for a long time the only 
nations that did attempt it. 

Of all the countries on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, Egypt 
seems to have been the first in which either agriculture or manufac- 
tures were cultivated and improved to any considerable degree. Up- 
per Egypt extends itself nowhere above a few miles from the Nile, 
and in Lower Egypt that great river breaks itself into many differ- 
ent canals,*^ which, with the assistance of a little art, seem to have 
afforded a communication by water-carriage, not only between all 
the great towns, but between all the considerable villages, and even 
to many farm-houses iii the country; nearly in the same manner as 
the Rhine and the Maese do in Holland at present. The extent and 
easiness of this inland navigation was probably one of the principal 
causes of the early improvement of Egypt. 

The improvements in agriculture and manufactures seem like- 
wise to have been of very great antiquity in the provinces of Ben- 
gal in the East Indies, and in some of the eastern provinces of 
China; though the great extent of this antiquity is not authenticat- 
ed by any histories of whose authority we, in this part of the world, 
are well assured. In Bengal the Ganges and several other great riv- 
ers form a great number of navigable canals ® in the same manner 
as the Nile does in Egypt. In the Eastern provinces of China too, 
several great rivers form, by their different branches, a multitude of 
canals, and by communicating with one another afford an inland 
navigation much more extensive than that either of the Nile or the 
Ganges, or perhaps than both of them put together. It is remark- 
able that neither the antient Egyptians, nor the Indians, nor the 
Chinese, encouraged foreign commerce, but seem all to have derived 
their great opulence from this inland navigation. 

All the inland parts of Africa, and all that part of Asia which lies 
any considerable way north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, the an- 
tient Scythia, the modern Tartary and Siberia, seem in all ages of 
the world to have been in the same barbarous and uncivilized state 
in which we find them at present. The sea of Tartary is the frozen 
ocean which admits of no navigation, and though some of the great- 
est rivers in the wcrl-^ run through that country,^ they are at too 


^It is only in recent times that this word has become applicable especially 
to artificial channels; see Murray, Oxford English Dictionary ^ s.v. 

® Ed. I reads “break themselves into many canals.'* 

®The real difficulty is that the mouths of the rivers are in the Arctic Sea, 



LIMIT OF DIVISION OF LABOUR 21 

great a distance from one another to carry commerce and communi- 
cation through the greater part of it. There are in Africa none of 
those great inlets, such as the Baltic and Adriatic seas in Europe, 
the Mediterranean and Euxine seas in both Europe and Asia, and 
the gulphs of Arabia, Persia, India, Bengal, and Siam, in Asia, to 
carry maritime commerce into the interior parts of that great conti- 
nent: and the great rivers of Africa are at too great a distance from 
one another to give occasion to any considerable inland navigation. 
The commerce besides which any nation can carry on by means of 
a river which does not break itself into any great number of branch- 
es or canals, and which runs into another territory before it reaches 
the sea, can never be very considerable; because it is always in the 
power of the nations who possess that other territory to obstruct 
the communication between the upper country and the sea. The 
navigation of the Danube is of very little use to the different states 
of Bavaria, Austria and Hungary, in comparison of what it would 
be if any of them possessed the whole of its course till it falls into 
the Black Sea.^^ 

so that they are separated. One of the objects of the Siberian railway is to 
connect them. 

Ed. I reads “any one” here. 

“ The passage corresponding to this chapter is comprised in one paragraph 
in Lectures, p, 172. 





Division 
of labour 
being es- 
tablished, 
every 
man lives 
by ex- 
changing. 


Difficul- 
ties of 
barter 
lead to 
the selec- 
tion of 
one com- 
modity as 
money, 


CHAPTER IV 

OF THE ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY 

When the division of labour has been once thoroughly establishea, 
it is but a very small part of a man’s wants which the produce of his 
own labour can supply. He supplies the far greater part of them by 
exchanging that surplus part of the produce of his own labour, 
which is over and above his own consumption, for such parts of the 
produce of other men’s labour as he has occasion for. Every man 
thus lives by exchanging, or becomes in some measure a merchant, 
and the society itself grows to be what is properly a commercial so- 
ciety. 

But when the division of labour first began to take place, this 
power of exchanging must frequently have been very much clogged 
and embarrassed in its operations. One man, we shall suppose, has 
more of a certain commodity than he himself has occasion for, while 
another has less. The former consequently would be glad to dispose 
of, and the latter to purchase, a part of this superfluity. But if this 
latter should chance to have nothing that the former stands in need 
of, no exchange can be made between them. The butcher has more 
meat in his shop than he himself can consume, and the brewer and 
the baker would each of them be willing to purchase a part of it. 
But they have nothing to off?r in exchange, except the different pro- 
ductions of their respective trades, and the butcher is already pro- 
vided with all the bread and beer which he has immediate occasion 
for. No exchange can, in this case, be made between them. He can- 
not be their merchant, nor they his customers; and they are all of 
them thus mutually less serviceable to one another. In order to 
avoid the inconveniency of such situations, every prudent man in 
every period of society, after the first establishment of the division 
of labour, must naturally have endeavoured to manage his affairs in 
such a manner, as to have at all times by him, besides the peculiar 
produce of his own industry, a ceitain quantity of some one com- 


22 



23 


ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY 

modity or other, such as he imagined few people would be likely to 
refuse in exchange for the produce of their industry.^ 

Many different commodities, it is probable, were successively 
both thought of and employed for this purpose. In the rude ages of 
society, cattle are said to have been the common instrument of com- 
merce; and, though they must have been a most inconvenient one, 
yet in old times we find things were frequently valued according to 
the number of cattle which had been given in exchange for them. 
The armour of Diomede, says Homer, cost only nine oxen ; but that 
of Glaucus cost an hundred oxen.^ Salt is said to be the common in- 
strument of commerce and exchanges in Abyssinia;^ a species of 
shells in some parts of the coast of India; dried cod at Newfound- 
land; tobacco in Virginia;^ sugar in some of our West India colo- 
nies; hides or dressed leather in some other countries; and there is 
at this day a village in Scotland where it is not uncommon, I am 
told, for a workman to carry nails instead of money to the baker’s 
shop or the ale-house.® 

In all countries, however, men seem at last to have been deter- 
mined by irresistible reasons to give the preference, for this employ- 
ment, to metals above every other commodity.^ Metals can not only 
be kept with as little loss as any other commodity, scarce any thing 
being less perishable than they are, but they can likewise, without 
any loss, be divided into any number of parts, as by fusion those 
parts can easily be reunited again; a quality which no other equally 

^The paragraph has a close resemblance to Harris, Money and Coins, pt. i., 
§§ I9j 20. 

^ Iliad, vi., 236: quoted with the same object in Pliny, Hist, Nat., lib. xxxiii., 
cap. i. ; Pufendorf, De jure naturae et gentium, lib. v., cap. v., § i ; Martin- 
Leake, Historical Account of English Money, 2nd ed., 1745, p. 4 and elsewhere. 

** Montesquieu, Esprit des lois, liv. xxii., chap i., note. 

*W. Douglass, A Summary Historical and Political of the First Planting, 
Progressive Improvements and Present State of the British Settlements in 
North America, 1760, vol. ii., p. 364. Certain law officers' fees in Washington 
were still computed in tobacco in 1888.— J’. J. Lalor, Cyclopaedia of Political 
Science, 1888, s.v. Money, p. 879. 

® Playfair, ed. of Wealth of Nations, 1805, vol. i., p. 36, says the explana- 
tion of this is that factors furnish the nailers with materials, and during the 
time they are working give them a credit for bread, cheese and chandlery 
goods, which they pay for in nails when the iron is worked up. The fact that 
nails are metal is forgotten at the beginning of the next paragraph in the 
text above. 

® For earlier theories as to these reasons see Grotius, De jure belli et pads, 
lib. ii., cap. xii., § 17; Pufendorf, De jure naturae et gentium, lib. v., cap. i., § 
13 ; Locke, Some Considerations, 2nd ed., 1696, p. 31 ; Law, Money and Trade, 
1705, ch. i.; Hutcheson, System of Moral Philosophy, 1755, vol. ii., pp. 55, $6; 
Montesquieu, Esprit des lois, liv. xxii., ch. ii. ; Cantillon, Essai sur la Nature 
du Commerce en giniral, 1755, pp. 153, 3 SS- 3 S 7 ; Harris, Money and Coins, 
pt. i., §§ 22-27, and cp. Lectures, pp. 182-185. 


for ex- 
ample, 
cattle, 
salt, 
shells, 
cod, to- 
bacco, 
sugar, 
leather 
and nails. 


Metals 

were 

eventually 
preferred 
because 
durable 
and divis- 
ible. 



H 


Iron, cop- 
per, gold 
and silver, 


were at 
first used 
in un- 
stamped 
bars, 


and after- 
wards 
stamped 
to show 
quantity 
and fine- 
ness; 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

durable commodities possess, and which more than any other qual- 
ity renders them fit to be the instruments of commerce and circula- 
tion. The man who wanted to buy salt, for example, and had noth- 
ing but cattle to give in exchange for it, must have been obliged to 
buy salt to the value of a whole ox, or a whole sheep, at a time. He 
could seldom buy less than this, because what he was to give for it 
could seldom be divided without loss; and if he had a mind to buy 
more, he must, for the same reasons, have been obliged to buy 
double or triple the quantity, the value, to wit, of two or three oxen, 
or of two or three sheep. If, on the contrary, instead of sheep or ox- 
en, he had metals to give in exchange for it, he could easily propor- 
tion the quantity of the metal to the precise quantity of the com- 
modity which he had immediate occasion for. 

Different metals have been made use of by different nations for 
this purpose. Iron was the common instrument of commerce among 
the antient Spartans; copper among the antient Romans; and gold 
and silver among all rich and commercial nations. 

Those metals seem originally to have been made use of for this 
purpose in rude bars, without any stamp or coinage. Thus we are 
told by Pliny,'^ upon the authority of Timaeus, an antient historian, 
that, till the time of Servius Tullius, the Romans had no coined 
money, but made use of unstamped bars of copper, to purchase 
whatever they had occasion for. These rude bars, therefore, per- 
formed at this time the function of money. 

The use of metals in this rude state was attended with two very 
considerable inconveniencies; first with the trouble of weighing; ^ 
and, secondly, with that ® of assaying them. In the precious metals, 
where a small difference in the quantity makes a great difference in 
the value, even the business of weighing, with proper exactness, re- 
quires at least very accurate weights and scales. The weighing of 
gold in particular is an operation of some nicety. In the coarser met- 
als, indeed, where a small error would be of little consequence, less 
accuracy would, no doubt, be necessary. Yet we should find it ex- 
cessively troublesome, if every time a poor man had occasion either 
to buy or sell a farthing’s worth of goods, he was obliged to weigh 
the farthing. The operation of assaying is still more difficult, still 
more tedious, and, unless a part of the metal is fairly melted in the 
crucible, with proper dissolvents, any conclusion that can be drawn 

^Plin. Hist. Nat. lib. 33. cap. 3. “Servius rex primus signavit aes. Antea 
rudi uses Romae Timaeus tradit.” Ed. i reads “authority of one Remeus, an 
antient author,” Remeus being the reading in the edition of Pliny in Smith’s 
library, cp. Bonar’s Catalogue of the Library of Adam Smith, 1894, p- 87. 
Ed. I does not contain the note. 

® Ed. I reads “weighing them.” 


® Ed. I reads “with the trouble.’ 



25 


ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY 

from it, is extremely uncertain. Before the institution of coined 
money, however, unless they went through this tedious and difficult 
operation, people must always have been liable to the grossest 
frauds and impositions, and instead of a pound weight of pure sil- 
ver, or pure copper, might receive in exchange for their goods, an 
adulterated composition of the coarsest and cheapest materials, 
which had, however, in their outward appearance, been made to re- 
semble those metals. To prevent such abuses, to facilitate ex- 
changes, and thereby to encourage aU sorts of industry and com- 
merce, it had been found necessary, in all countries that have made 
any considerable advances towards improvement, to affix a public 
stamp upon certain quantities of such particular metals, as were in 
those countries commonly made use of to purchase goods. Hence 
the origin of coined money, and of those public offices called 
mints; institutions exactly of the same nature with those of the 
aulnagers and stampmasters of woollen and linen cloth.^^ All of 
them are equally meant to ascertain, by means of a public stamp, 
the quantity and uniform goodness of those different commodities 
when brought to market. 

The first public stamps of this kind that were affixed to the cur- stamps to 
rent metals, seem in many cases to have been intended to ascertain, 
what it was both most difficult and most important to ascertain, the intro- 
goodness or fineness of the metal, and to have resembled the sterl- duced 
ing mark which is at present affixed to plate and bars of silver, or ’ 
the Spanish mark which is sometimes a^ed to ingots of gold, and 
which being struck only upon one side of the piece, and not cover- 
ing the whole surface, ascertains the fineness, but not the weight of 
the metal. Abraham weighs to Ephron the four hundred shekels of 
silver which he had agreed to pay for the field of Machpelah.^^ 

They are said however to be the current money of the merchant, 
and yet are received by weight and not by tale, in the same manner 
as ingots of gold and bars of silver are at present. The revenues of 
the antient Saxon kings of England are said to have been paid, not 
in money but in kind, that is, in victuals and provisions of all sorts. 

Aristotle, Politics, 1257a, 38-41; quoted by Pufendorf, De jure naturae 
et gentium, Hb. v,, cap. i., § 12. 

“•The aulnager measur^ woollen doth in England under 25 Ed. III., st. 4, 
c. I. See John Smith, Chronicon Rusticum-Commerciale or Memoirs of Wool, 

1747, vol, i., p. 37. The stampmasters of linen cloth in the linen districts of 
Scotland were appointed under 10 Ann., c. 21, to prevent “divers abuses and 
deceits” which “have of late years been used in the manufacturies of linen 
doth . . . with respect to the lengths, breadths and unequal sorting of yarn, 
which leads to the great debasing and undervaluing of the said linen cloth 
both at home and in foreign parts.”— Statutes of the Realm, vol. ix., p. 682. 

” Genesis xxiii. 16. 



and coin- 
age to 
show 
weight 
later. 


The 

names of 
coins ori- 
ginally 
expressed 
their 
weight. 


26 the wealth of nations 

William the Conqueror introduced the custom of paying them in 
money This money, however, was, for a long time, received at 
the exchequer, by weight and not by tale.^^ 

The inconveniency and difficulty of weighing those metals with 
exactness gave occasion to the institution of coins, of which the 
stamp, covering entirely both sides of the piece and sometimes the 
edges too, was supposed to ascertain not only the fineness, but the 
weight of the metal. Such coins, therefore, were received by tale as 
at present, without the trouble of weighing. 

The denominations of those coins seem originally to have ex- 
pressed the weight or quantity of metal contained in them. In the 
time of Servius Tullius, who first coined money at Rome,^” the Ro- 
man As or Pondo contained a Roman pound of good copper. It was 
divided in the same manner as our Troyes pound, into twelve 
ounces, each of which contained a real ounce of good copper. The 
English pound sterling in the time of Edward L, contained a pound, 
Tower weight, of silver of a known fineness. The Tower pound 
seems to have been something more than the Roman pound, and 
something less than the Troyes pound. This last was not introduced 
into the mint of England till the i8th of Henry VIII. The French 
livre contained in the time of Charlemagne a pound, Troyes weight, 
of silver of a known fineness. The fair of Troyes in Champaign was 
at that time frequented by all the nations of Europe, and the 
weights and measures of so famous a market were generally known 
and esteemed. The Scots money pound contained, from the time of 
Alexander the First to that of Robert Bruce, a pound of silver of 
the same weight and fineness with the English pound sterling. Eng- 
lish, French, and Scots pennies too, contained all of them originally 
a real pennyweight of silver, the twentieth part of an ounce, and 
the two-hundred-and-fortieth part of a pound. The shilling too 
seems originally to have been the denomination of a weight. When 
wheat is at twelve shillings the quarter, says an antient statute of 
Henry III. then wastel bread of a farthing shall weigh eleven shill- 
ings and four pence}^ The proportion, however, between the shill- 

“ “King William the First, for the better pay of his warriors, caused the 
firmes which till his time had for the most part been answered in victuals, to 
be converted in peemiam numeratam.^^—tomidcs, Report containing an Es- 
say for the Amendment of the Silver Coins, 1695, P* 4- Hume, whom Adam 
Smith often follows, makes no such absurd statement, History, ed. of 1773, 
vol. i., pp. 225, 226. 

“ Lowndes, Essay, p. 4. “ Above, p. 24. 

^ The Assize of Bread and Ale, 51 Hen. III., contains an elaborate scale be- 
giiming, “When a quarter of wheat is sold for xii d. then wastel bread of a 
farthing shall weigh vi 1. and xvi s.” and goes on to the figures quoted in the 
text above. The statute is quoted at second-hand from Martin Folkes’ Table 
of English Silver Coins with the same object by Harris, Essay upon Money 



ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY 27 

ing and either the penny on the one hand, or the pound on the other, 
seems not to have been so constant and uniform as that between the 
penny and the pound. During the first race of the kings of France, 
the French sou or shilling appears upon different occasions to have 
contained five, twelve, twenty, and forty pennies.^’^ Among the an- 
tient Saxons a shilling appears at one time to have contained only 
five pennies,^® and it is not improbable that it may have been as va- 
riable among them as among their neighbours, the antient Franks. 
From the time of Charlemagne among the French,^® and from that 
of William the Conqueror among the English,^® the proportion be- 
tween the pound, the shilling, and the penny, seems to have been 
uniformly the same as at present, though the value of each has been 
very different. For in every country of the world, I believe, the av- 
arice and injustice of princes and sovereign states, abusing the con- 
fidence of their subjects, have by degrees diminished the real quan- 
tity of metal, which had been originally contained in their coins. 
The Roman As, in the latter ages of the Republic, was reduced to 
the twenty-fourth part of its original value, and, instead of weigh- 
ing a pound, came to weigh only half an ounce.^^ The English pound 
and penny contain at present about a third only; the Scots pound 
and penny about a thirty-sixth; and the French pound and penny 
about a sixty-sixth part of their original value.^^ By means of those 
operations the princes and sovereign states which performed them 
were enabled, in appearance, to pay their debts and to fulfil their 
engagements with a smaller quantity of silver than would otherwise 
have been requisite. It was indeed in appearance only; for their 
creditors were really defrauded of a part of what was^due to them. 
All other debtors in the state were allowed the same privilege, and 
might pay with the same nominal sum of the new and debased coin 
whatever they had borrowed in the old. Such operations, therefore, 
have always proved favourable to the debtor, and ruinous to the 

and Coins, pt. i., § 29, but Harris does not go far enough in the scale to bring 
in the penny as a weight. As to this scale see below, pp. 178, 182, 183. 

Ed. I reads “twenty, forty and forty-eight pennies.” Gamier, Recherches 
sur la nature et les causes de la richesse des nations, par Adam Smith, 1802, 
tom. V., p. ss, in a note on this passage says that the sou was always twelve 
deniers. 

^®Hume, History of England, ed. of 1773, i., p. 226. Fleetwood, Chronicon 
Preciosum, 1707, p. 30. These authorities say there were 48 shillings in the 
pound, so that 240 pence would still make £1. 

Harris, Money and Coins, pt. i., § 29. 

“It is thought that soon after the Conquest a pound sterling was divided 
into twenty shillings.” — ^Hume, History of England, ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 227, 

Pliny, Hist. Nat., lib. xxxiii., cap. iii.; see below, pp. 883, 884. 

Harris, Money and Coins, p. i., § 30, note, makes the French livre about 
one seventieth part of its original value. 



The next 
inquiry is 
what rules 
determine 
exchange- 
able 
value. 

Value 
may mean 
either 
value in 
use or 
value in 
exchange. 


Three 

questions, 

(i) where- 
in consists 
the real 
price of 
commodi- 
ties, 


28 the wealth of nations 

creditor, and have sometimes produced a greater and more univer- 
sal revolution in the fortunes of private persons, than could have 
been occasioned by a very great public calamity 

It is in this manner that money has become in all civilized nations 
the universal instrument of commerce, by the intervention of which 
goods of all kinds are bought and sold, or exchanged for one an- 
other 

What are the rules which men naturally observe in exchanging 
them either for money or for one another, I shall now proceed to 
examine. These rules determine what may be called the relative or 
exchangeable value of goods. 

The word value, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, 
and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular object, and 
sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which the posses- 
sion of that object conveys. The one may be called ‘Value in use;” 
the other, “value in exchange.” The things which have the greatest 
value in use have frequently little or no value in exchange; and on 
the contrary, those which have the greatest value in exchange have 
frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is more useful than wa- 
ter: but it will purchase scarce any thing; scarce any thing can be 
had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary, has scarce any 
value in use; but a very great quantity of other goods may fre- 
quently be had in exchange for it.^® 

In order to investigate the principles which regulate the ex- 
changeable value of commodities, I shall endeavour to shew, 

First, what is the real measure of this exchangeable value; or, 
wherein consists the real price of all commodities. 

Secondly, what are the different parts of which this real price is 
composed or made up. 

^The subject of debased and depreciated coinage occurs again below, pp. 
35 j i94> 516-522, 882-886. One of the reasons why gold and silver became the 
most usual forms of money is dealt with below, pp. 171, 172. See Coin and 
Money in the index. 

®*In Lectures, pp. 182-190, where much of this chapter is to be found, 
money is considered “first as the measure of value and then as the medium of 
permutation or exchange.” Money is said to have had its origin in the fact 
that men naturally fell upon one commodity with which to compare the value 
of all other commodities. When this commodity was once selected it becafne 
the medium of exchange. In this chapter money comes into use from the first 
as a medium of exchange, and its use as a measure of value is not mentioned. 
The next chapter explains that it is vulgarly used as a measure of value be- 
cause it is used as an instrument of commerce or medium of exchange. 

^Lectures, p. 157. Law, Money and Trade, 1705, ch. i. (followed by Harris, 
Money and Coins, pt. i., § 3), contrasts the value of water with that of dia- 
monds. The cheapness of water is referred to by Plato, Euthydem, 304 B., 
quoted by Pufendorf, De jure naturce et gentium, lib. v., cap. i., § 6; cp. Bar- 
beyrac’s note on § 4. 



29 


ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY 

And, lastly, what are the different circumstances which some- 
times raise some or all of these different parts of price above, and 
sometimes sink them below their natural or ordinary rate; or, what 
are the causes which sometimes hinder the market price, that is, the 
actual price of commodities, from coinciding exactly with what may 
be called their natural price. 

I shall endeavour to explain, as fully and distinctly as I can, those 
three subjects in the three following chapters, for which I must very 
earnestly entreat both the patience and attention of the reader: his 
patience in order to examine a detail which may perhaps in some 
places appear unnecessarily tedious; and his attention in order to 
understand what may, perhaps, after the fullest explication which I 
am capable of giving of it, appear still in some degree obscure. I am 
always willing to run some hazard of being tedious in order to be 
sure that I am perspicuous; and after taking the utmost pains that 
I can to be perspicuous, some obscurity may still appear to remain 
upon a subject in its own nature extremely abstracted. 

“ Ed. I reads “subject which is.” 


♦ 


(2) what 
are the 
different 
parts of 
this price, 

(3) why 
the mar- 
ket price 
sometimes 
diverges 
from this 
price, 

will be 
answered 
in the 
next three 
chapters. 



CHAPTER V 


Labour is 
the real 
measure 
of ex- 
change- 
able 
value, 


and the 
first price 
paid for 
all things. 


OF THE REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE OF COMMODITIES, OR OF THEIR 
PRICE IN LABOUR, AND THEIR PRICE IN MONEY 

Every man is rich or poor according to the degree in which he can 
afford to enjoy the necessaries, conveniencies; and amusements of 
human life.^ But after the division of labour has once thoroughly 
taken place, it is but a very small part of these with which a man’s 
own labour can supply him. The far greater part of them he must 
derive from the labour of other people, and he must be rich or poor 
according to the quantity of that labour which he can command, or 
which he can afford to purchase. The value of any commodity, 
therefore, to the person who possesses it, and who means not to use 
or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other commodities, is 
equal to the quantity of labour which it enables him to purchase or 
command. Labour, therefore, is the real measure of the exchange- 
able value of all commodities. 

The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the 
man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring it. 
What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired it, 
and who wants to dispose of it or exchange it for something else, is 
the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which it can 
impose upon other people. What is bought with money or with 
goods is purchased by labour, ^ as much as what we acquire by the 
toil of our own body. That money or those goods indeed save us this 
toil. They contain the value of a certain quantity of labour which 
we exchange for what is supposed at the time to contain the value of 
an equal quantity. Labour was the first price, the original purchase- 
money that was paid for all things. It was not by gold or by silver, 
but by labour, that all the wealth of the world was originally pur- 
chased; and its value, to those who possess it, and who want to ex- 

^ “La richesse en elle-meme n’est autre chose que la nourriture, les com- 
modit^s et les agrements de la vie ”#-Cantillon, Essaz, pp. i, 2. 

® “Everything in the world is purchased by labour.’'— Hume, “Of Com- 
merce,” in Political Discourses^ 1752, p. 12. 



REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 3i 

change it for some new productions, is precisely equal to the quan- 
tity of labour which it can enable them to purchase or command. 

Wealth, as Mr. Hobbes says, is power But the person who either 
acquires, or succeeds to a great fortune, does not necessarily acquire 
or succeed to any political power, either civil or military. His for- 
tune may, perhaps, af ord him the means of acquiring both, but the 
mere possession of that fortune does not necessarily convey to him 
either. The power which that possession immediately and directly 
conveys to him, is the power of purchasing; a certain command over 
all the labour, or over all the produce of labour which is then in the 
market. His fortune is greater or less, precisely in proportion to the 
extent of this power; or to the quantity either of other men’s labour, 
or, what is the same thing, of the produce of other men’s labour, 
which it enables him to purchase or command. The exchangeable 
value of every thing must always be precisely equal to the extent of 
this power which it conveys to its owner 
But though labour be the real measure of the exchangeable value 
of all commodities, it is not that by which their value is commonly 
estimated. It is often difficult to ascertain the proportion between 
two different quantities of labour. The time spent in two different 
sorts of work will not always alone determine this proportion. The 
different degrees of hardship endured, and of ingenuity exercised, 
must likewise be taken into account. There may be more labour in 
an hour’s hard work than in two hours easy business; or in an hour’s 
application to a trade which it cost ten years labour to learn, than in 
a month’s industry at an ordinary and obvious employment. But it 
is not easy to find any accurate measure either of hardship or inge- 
nuity. In exchanging indeed the different productions of different 
sorts of labour for one another, some allowance is commonly made 
for both. It is adjusted, however, not by any accurate measure, but 
by the higgling and bargaining of the market, according to that sort 
of rough equality which, though not exact, is sufficient for carrying 
on the business of common life.^' 

Every commodity besides, is more frequently exchanged for, and 
thereby compared with, other commodities than with labour. It is 
more natural therefore, to estimate its exchangeable value by the 
quantity of some other commodity than by that of the labour which 
it can purchase. The greater part of people too understand better 

'^“Also riches joined with liberality is Power, because it procureth friends 
and servants; without liberality not so, because in this case they defend not 
but expose men to envy as a Leviathan, L, x. 

*This paragraph appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3 . 

® The absence of any reference to the lengthy discussion of this subject in 
chap. X. is curious. 


Wealth is 
power of 
purchas- 
ing la- 
bour. 


But value 
is not 
common- 
ly esti- 
mated by 
labour, 
because 
labour is 
difficult 
to mea- 
sure, 


and com- 
modities 
are more 
frequently 
exchanged 
for other 
commodi- 
ties, 



32 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


especially 
money, 
which is 
therefore 
more fre- 
quently 
used in es- 
timating 
value. 


But gold 
and silver 
vary in 
value, 
sometimes 
costing 
more and 
sometimes 
less la- 
bour, 
whereas 
equal la- 
bour al- 
ways 
means 
equal sac- 
rifice to 
the la- 
bourer, 


what is meant by a quantity of a particular commodity, than by a 
quantity of labour. The one is a plain palpable object; the other an 
abstract notion, which, though it can be made sufficiently intelli- 
gible, is not altogether so natural and obvious. 

But when barter ceases, and money has become the common in- 
strument of commerce, every particular commodity is more fre- 
quently exchanged for money than for any other commodity. The 
butcher seldom carries his beef or his mutton to the baker, or the 
brewer, in order to exchange them for bread or for beer; but he car- 
ries them to the market, where he exchanges them for money, and 
afterwards exchanges that money for bread and for beer. The quan- 
tity of money which he gets for them regulates too the quantity of 
bread and beer which he can afterwards purchase. It is more natur- 
al and obvious to him, therefore, to estimate their value by the 
quantity of money, the commodity for which he immediately ex- 
changes them, than by that of bread and beer, the commodities for 
which he can exchange them only by the intervention of another 
commodity; and rather to say that his butcher’s meat is worth 
threepence or fourpence a pound, than that it is worth three or four 
pounds of bread, or three or four quarts of small beer, Hence it 
comes to pass, that the exchangeable value of every commodity is 
more frequently estimated by the quantity of money, than by the 
quantity either of labour or of any other commodity which can be 
had in exchange for it. 

Gold and silver, however, like every other commodity, vary in 
their value, are sometimes cheaper and sometimes dearer, some> 
times of easier and sometimes of more difficult purchase. The quan- 
tity of labour which any particular quantity of them can purchase 
or command, or the quantity of other goods which it will exchange 
for, depends always upon the fertility or barrenness of the mines 
which happen to be known about the time when such exchanges are 
made. The discovery of the abundant mines of America reduced, in 
the sixteenth century, the value of gold and silver in Europe to 
about a third of what it had been before.® As it cost less labour to 
bring those metals from the mine to the market, so when they were 
brought thither ^ they could purchase or command less labour; and 
this revolution in their value, though perhaps the greatest, is by no 
means the only one of which history gives some account. But as a 
measure of quantity, such as the natural foot, fathom, or handful, 
which is continually varying in its own quantity, can never be an 
accurate measure of the quantity of other things; so a commodity 


* Below, p. 191. 


^ Ed. I reads “there.’ 



REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 33 

which is itself continually varying in its own value, can never be an 
accurate measure of the value of other commodities. Equal quanti- 
ties of labour, at all times and places, may be said to be ® of equal 
value to the labourer. In his ordinary state of health, strength and 
spirits; in the ordinary degree of his skill and dexterity,® he must 
always lay down the same portion of his ease, his liberty, and his 
happiness. The price which he pays must always be the same, what- 
ever may be the quantity of goods which he receives in return for 
it. Of these, indeed, it may sometimes purchase a greater and some- 
times a smaller quantity; but it is their value which varies, not that 
of the labour which purchases them. At all times and places that is 
dear which it is difficult to come at, or which it costs much labour to 
acquire ; and that cheap which is to be had easily, or with very little 
labour. Labour alone, therefore, never varying in its own value, is 
alone the ultimate and real standard by which the value of all com- 
modities can at all times and places be estimated and compared. It 
is their real price; money is their nominal price only. 

But though equal quantities of labour are always of equal value 
to the labourer, yet to the person who employs him they appear 
sometimes to be of greater and sometimes of smaller value. He pur- 
chases them sometimes with a greater and sometimes with a smaller 
quantity of goods, and to him the price of labour seems to vary like 
that of all other things. It appears to him dear in the one case, and 
cheap in the other. In reality, however, it is the goods which are 
cheap in the one case, and dear in the other. 

In this popular sense, therefore, labour, like commodities, may 
be said to have a real and a nominal price. Its real price may be said 
to consist in the quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies of 
life which are given for it; its nominal price, in the quantity of 
money. The labourer is rich or poor, is well or ill rewarded, in pro- 
portion to the real, not to the nominal price of his labour. 

The distinction between the real and the nominal price of com- 
modities and labour, is not a matter of mere speculation, but may 
sometimes be of considerable use in practice. The same real price is 
always of the same value; but on account of the variations in the 
value of gold and silver, the same nominal price is sometimes of 
very different values. When a landed estate, therefore, is sold with 
a reservation of a perpetual rent, if it is intended that this rent 
should always be of the same value, it is of importance to the fam- 
ily in whose favour it is reserved, that it should not consist in a par- 

* Ed. I reads ‘Tqual quantities of labour must at all times and places be.” 

® The words from “In his ordinary state of health” to “dexterity” appear 
first in ed. 2 . 


although 
the em- 
ployer re- 
gards la- 
bour as 
varying in 
value. 


So regard- 
ed, labour 
has a real 
and a 
nominal 
price. 


The dis- 
tinction 
between 
real and 
nominal is 
sometimes 
useful in 
practice, 



since the 
amount of 
metal in 
coins 
tends to 
diminish, 


and the 
value of 
gold and 
silver to 
fall. 


English 
rents re- 
served in 
money 
have fal- 
len to a 


34 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ticular sum of money Its value would in this case be liable to va- 
riations of two different kinds; first, to those which arise from the 
different quantities of gold and silver which are contained at differ- 
ent times in coin of the same denomination; and, secondly, to those 
which arise from the different values of equal quantities of gold and 
silver at different times. 

Princes and sovereign states have frequently fancied that they 
had a temporary interest to diminish the quantity of pure metal 
contained in their coins; but they seldom have fancied that they 
had any to augment it. The quantity of metal contained in the 
coins, I believe of all nations, has, accordingly, been almost contin- 
ually diminishing, and hardly ever augmenting.^^ Such variations 
therefore tend almost always to diminish the value of a money 
rent. 

The discovery of the mines of America diminished the value of 
gold and silver in Europe. This diminution, it is commonly sup- 
posed, though I apprehend without any certain proof, is still going 
on gradually,^- and is likely to continue to do so for a long time. 
Upon this supposition, therefore, such variations are more likely to 
diminish, than to augment the value of a money rent, even though 
it should be stipulated to be paid, not in such a quantity of coined 
money of such a denomination (in so many pounds sterling, for ex- 
ample) , but in so many ounces either of pure silver, or of silver of a 
certain standard. 

The rents which have been reserved in corn have preserved their 
value much better than those which have been reserved in money, 
even where the denomination of the coin has not been altered. By 
the 1 8th of Elizabeth it was enacted, That a third of the rent of 
all college leases should be reserved in corn, to be paid, either in 

“Be above all things careful how you make any composition or agreement 
for any long space of years to receive a certain price of money for the corn 
that is due to you, although for the present it may seem a tempting bargain.” 
—Fleetwood, Chronicon Predosum, p. 174. 

^ Above, pp. 26-27. ^ Below, pp. 215-217. 

“ C. 6, which applies to Oxford, Cambridge, Winchester and Eton, and pro- 
vides that no college shall make any lease for lives or years of tithes, arable 
land or pasture without securing that at least one-third of “tholde” (presum- 
ably the whole not the old) rent should be paid in coin. The Act was pro- 
moted by Sir Thomas Smith to the astonishment, it is said, of his fellow-mem- 
bers of Parliament, who could not see what difference it would make. “But the 
knight took the advantage of the present cheapness; knowing hereafter grain 
would grow dearer, mankind daily multiplying, and licence being lately given 
for transportation. So that at this day much emolument redoundeth to the 
colleges in each university, by the passing of this Act; and though their rents 
stand still, their revenues do increase.”— Fuller, HisU of the University of 
Cambridge, 1655, p. 144, quoted in Strype, Life of the learned Sir Thomas 
Smith, 1698, p. 192. 



REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 35 

kind, or according to the current prices at the nearest public mar- fourth 

ket. The money arising from this corn rent, though originally but a ^ 

third of the whole, is in the present times, according to Doctor 
Blackstone, commonly near double of what arises from the other 
two-thirds.^^ The old money rents of colleges must, according to 
this account, have sunk almost 'to a fourth part of their ancient 
value; or are worth little more than a fourth part of the corn which 
they were formerly worth. But since the reign of Philip and Mary 
the denomination of the English coin has undergone little or no al- 
teration, and the same number of pounds, shillings and pence have 
contained very nearly the same quantity of pure silver. This degra- 
dation, therefore, in the value of the money rents of colleges, has 
arisen altogether from the degradation in the value of silver. 

When the degradation in the value of silver is combined with the and simi- 
diminution of the quantity of it contained in the coin of the same 
denomination, the loss is frequently still greater. In Scotland, where French 
the denomination of the coin has undergone much greater altera- rents al- 
tions than it ever did in England, and in France, where it has under- nothing, 
gone still greater than it ever did in Scotland,^® some ancient rents, 
originally of considerable value, have in this manner been reduced 
almost to nothing. 

Equal quantities of labour will at distant times be purchased Corn 
more nearly with equal quantities of corn, the subsistence of the la- 
bourer, than with equal quantities of gold and silver, or perhaps of stable 
any other commodity. Equal quantities of corn, therefore, will, at 
distant times, be more nearly of the same real value, or enable the ^nts7 
possessor to purchase or command more nearly the same quantity 
of the labour of other people. They will do this, I say, more nearly 
than equal quantities of almost any other commodity; for even 
equal quantities of corn will not do it exactly. The subsistence of 
the labourer, or the real price of labour, as I shall endeavour to 
show hereafter,^® is very different upon different occasions; more 
liberal in a society advancing to opulence, than in one that is stand- 
ing still; and in one that is standing still, than in one that is going 
backwards. Every other commodity, however, will at any particu- 
lar time purchase a greater or smaller quantity of labour in propor- 
tion to the quantity of subsistence which it can purchase at that 
time. A rent therefore reserved in corn is liable only to the varia- 
tions in the quantity of labour which a certain quantity of corn can 
purchase. But a rent reserved in any other commodity is liable, not 
only to the variations in the quantity of labour which any particular 


Commentaries, vol. ii., p. 322. 

“Above, p. 27. “ Below, pp. 69-73. 



but liable 
to much 
larger an- 
nual vari- 
ations. 


so that 
labour is 
the only 
universal 
standard. 


36 the wealth of nations 

quantity of corn can purchase, but to the variations in the quantity 
of corn which can be purchased by any particular quantity of that 
commodity. 

Though the real value of a corn rent, it is to be observed how- 
ever, varies much less from century to century than that of a money 
rent, it varies much more from year to year. The money price of la- 
bour, as I shall endeavour to show hereafter,^^ does not fluctuate 
from year to year with the money price of corn, but seems to be 
every where accommodated, not to the temporary or occasional, 
but to the average or ordinary price of that necessary of life. The 
average or ordinary price of corn again is regulated, as I shall like- 
wise endeavour to show hereafter,^® by the value of silver, by the 
richness or barrenness of the mines which supply the market with 
that metal, or by the quantity of labour which must be employed, 
and consequently of corn which must be consumed, in order to 
bring any particular quantity of silver from the mine to the mar- 
ket. But the value of silver, though it sometimes varies greatly from 
century to century, seldom varies much from year to year, but fre- 
quently continues the same, or very nearly the same, for half a cen- 
tury or a century together. The ordinary or average money price of 
corn, therefore, may, during so long a period, continue the same or 
very nearly the same too, and along with it the money price of la- 
bour, provided, at least, the society continues, in other respects, in 
the same or nearly in the same condition. In the mean time the tem- 
porary and occasional price of corn may frequently be double, one 
year, of what it had been the year before, or fluctuate, for example, 
from five and twenty to fifty shillings the quarter.^® But when com 
is at the latter price, not only the nominal, but the real value of a 
corn rent will be double of what it is when at the former, or will 
command double the quantity either of labour or of the greater part 
of other commodities; the money price of labour, and along with it 
that of most other things, continuing the same during all these fluc- 
tuations. 

Labour, therefore, it appears evidently, is the only universal, as 
well as the only accurate measure of value, or the only standard by 
which we can compare the values of different commodities at all 
times and at all places. We cannot estimate, it is allowed, the real 
value of different commodities from century to century by the 
quantities of silver which were given for them. We cannot estimate 
it from year to year by the quantities of com. By the quantities of 
labour we can, with the greatest accuracy, estimate it both from 


Below, pp. 74, 85, 86. 
'®Ed. I reads “it” 


Below, chap, xi, see esp. p. 191. 

“ Ed. I places the “for example” here. 



37 


REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 

century to century and from year to year. From century to century, 
corn is a better measure than silver, because from century to cen- 
tury, equal quantities of corn will command the same quantity of 
labour more nearly than equal quantities of silver. From year to 
year, on the contrary, silver is a better measure than corn, because 
equal quantities of it will more nearly command the same quantity 
of labour ,21 

But though in establishing perpetual rents, or even in letting very But in or- 
long leases, it may be of use to distinguish between real and nominal 
price; it is of none in buying and selling, the more common and or- tions 
dinary transactions of human life. money is 

At the same time and place the real and the nominal price of all 
commodities are exactly in proportion to one another. The more or 
less money you get for any commodity, in the London market, for fectly ac- 
example, the more or less labour it will at that time and place en- curate at 
able you to purchase or command. At the same time and place, time and 

therefore, money is the exact measure of the real exchangeable place, 

value of all commodities. It is so, however, at the same time and 
place only. 

Though at distant places, there is no regular proportion between and the 
the real and the money price of commodities, yet the merchant who to 
carries goods from the one to the other has nothing to consider but sidered in 
their money price, or the difference between the quantity of silver transac- 
for which he buys them, and that for which he is likely to sell them. tween^S?- 
Half an ounce of silver at Canton in China may command a greater tant 
quantity both of labour and of the necessaries and conveniencies of 
life, than an ounce at London. A commodity, therefore, which sells 
for half an ounce of silver at Canton may there be really dearer, of 

England and this part of the world, wheat being the constant and 
most general food, not altering with the fashion, not growing by chance: but 
as the farmers sow more or less of it, which they endeavour to proportion, as 
near as can be guessed to the consumption, abstracting the overplus of the 
precedent year in their provision for the next; and vice versa, it must needs 
fall out that it keeps the nearest proportion to its consumption (which is more 
studied and designed in this than other commodities) of anything, if you take 
it for seven or twenty years together: though perhaps the scarcity of one year, 
caused by the accidents of the season, may very much vary it from the im- 
mediately precedent or following. Wheat, therefore, in this part of the world 
(and that grain which is the constant general food of any other country) is 
the fittest measure to judge of the altered value of things in any long tract of 
time: and therefore wheat here, rice in Turkey, etc., is the fittest thing to re- 
serve a rent in, which is designed to be constantly the same for all future 
ages. But money is the best measure of the altered value of things in a few 
years: because its vent is the same and its quantity alters slowly.^ But wheat, 
or any other grain, cannot serve instead of money: because of its bulkiness 
and too quick change of its quantity.” — ^Locke, Some Considerations of the 
Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and Raising the Value of Money, 
ed. of 1696, pp. 74, 75. 



So it is no 
wonder 
that 
money 
price has 
been more 
attended 
to. 


In this 
work corn 
prices will 
sometimes 
be used. 


Several 
metals 
have been 
coined, 
but only 
one is 
used as 
the stan- 


3S the wealth of nations 

more real importance to the man who possesses it there, than a com- 
modity which sells for an ounce at London is to the man who pos- 
sesses it at London. If a London merchant, however, can buy at 
Canton for half an ounce of silver, a commodity which he can after- 
wards sell at London for an ounce, he gains a hundred per cent, by 
the bargain, just as much as if an ounce of silver was at London ex- 
actly of the same value as at Canton. It is of no importance to him 
that half an ounce of silver at Canton would have given him the 
command of more labour and of a greater quantity of the neces- 
saries and conveniences of life than an ounce can do at London. An 
ounce at London will always give him the command of double the 
quantity of all these, which half an ounce could have done there, 
and this is precisely what he wants. 

As it is the nominal or money price of goods, therefore, which 
finally determines the prudence or imprudence of all purchases and 
sales, and thereby regulates almost the whole business of common 
life in which price is concerned, we cannot wonder that it should 
have been so much more attended to than the real price. 

In such a work as this, however, it may sometimes be of use to 
compare the different real values of a particular commodity at dif- 
ferent times and places, or the different degrees of power over the 
labour of other people which it may, upon different occasions, have 
given to those who possessed it. We must in this case compare, not 
so much the different quantities of silver for which it was commonly 
sold, as the different quantities of labour which those different 
quantities of silver could have purchased. But the current prices of 
labour at distant times and places can scarce ever be known with 
any degree of exactness. Those of corn, though they have in few 
places been regularly recorded, are in general better known and 
have been more frequently taken notice of by historians and other 
writers. We must generally, therefore, content ourselves with them, 
not as being always exactly in the same proportion as the current 
prices of labour, but as being the nearest approximation which can 
commonly be had to that proportion. I shall hereafter have occasion 
to make several comparisons of this kind.^^ 

In the progress of industry, commercial nations have found it 
convenient to coin several different metals into money; gold for 
larger payments, silver for purchases of moderate value, and cop- 
per, or some other coarse metal, for those of still smaller considera- 
tion. They have always, however, considered one of those metals as 
more peculiarly the measure of value than any of the other two ; and 


“ Ed. I reads “than one which sells for an ounce at London to.’ 
^ Below, chap. xi. passim. 



REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 39 

this preference seems generally to have been given to the metal 
which they happened first to make use of as the instrument of com- 
merce. Having once begun to use it as their standard, which they 
must have done when they had no other money, they have generally 
continued to do so even when the necessity was not the same. 

The Romans are said to have had nothing but copper money till 
within five years before the first Punic war,^’^ when they first began 
to coin silver. Copper, therefore, appears to have continued always 
the measure of value in that republic. At Rome all accounts appear 
to have been kept, and the value of all estates to have been comput- 
ed, either in Asses or in Sestertii, The As was always the denomina- 
tion of a copper coin. The word Sestertius signifies two ^45^65 and a 
half. Though the Sestertius ^ therefore, was originally a silver 
coin, its value was estimated in copper. At Rome, one who owed a 
great deal of money, was said to have a great deal of other people's 
copper.2® 

The northern nations who established themselves upon the ruins 
of the Roman empire, seem to have had silver money from the first 
beginning of their settlements, and not to have known either gold or 
copper coins for several ages thereafter. There were silver coins in 
England in the time of the Saxons; but there was little gold coined 
till the time of Edward III. nor any copper till that of James I. of 
Great Britain. In England, therefore, and for the same reason, I be- 
lieve, in all other modern nations of Europe, all accounts are kept, 
and the value of all goods and of all estates is generally computed 
in silver: and when we mean to express the amount of a person's 
fortune, we seldom mention the number of guineas, but the number 
of pounds sterling which we suppose would be given for it. 

Originally, in all countries, I believe, a legal tender of payment 
could be made only in the coin of that metal,^^ which was pecu- 
liarly considered as the standard or measure of value. In England, 
gold was not considered as a legal tender for a long time after it was 
coined into money. The proportion between the values of gold and 
silver money was not fixed by any public law or proclamation; but 
was left to be settled by the market. If a debtor offered payment in 
gold, the creditor might either reject such payment altogether, or 
accept of it at such a valuation of the gold as he and his debtor 
could agree upon. Copper is not at present a legal tender, except in 
the change of the smaller silver coins. In this state of things the dis- 


dard, and 
one first 
that usu- 
ally the 
used in 
com- 
merce, 

as the Ro- 
mans used 
copper, 


and mod- 
ern 

European 

nations 

silver 


The 

standard 
metal 
originally 
was the 
only legal 
tender, 


Pliny, lib. xxxiii. c 3 . This note is not in ed. i. 

^ Eds. I and 2 read “always ^ Habere aes alienum 

^Ed. I does not contain “sterling.” ^Ed. i places the “originally” here. 

^ Ed. I places the “only” here. 



later the 
propor- 
tion be- 
tween the 
values of 
the two 
metals is 
declared 
by law, 
and both 
are legal 
tender, 
the dis- 
tinction 
between 
them 
ceasing to 
be of im- 
portance, 

except 
when a 
change is 
made in 
the regu- 
lated pro- 
portion. 


40 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

linction between the metal which was the standard, and that which 
was not the standard, was something more than a nominal distinc- 
tion. 

In process of time, and as people became gradually more familiar 
with the use of the different metals in coin, and consequently better 
acquainted with the proportion between their respective values, it 
has in most countries, I believe, been found convenient to ascertain 
this proportion, and to declare by a public law that a guinea, for 
example, of such a weight and fineness, should exchange for one- 
and-twenty shillings, or be a legal tender tor a debt of that 
amount.^’- In this state of things, and during the continuance of any 
one regulated proportion of this kind, the distinction between the 
metal which is the standard, and that which is not the standard, be- 
comes little more than a nominal distinction.^^ 

In consequence of any change, however, in this regulated propor- 
tion, this distinction becomes, or at least seems to become, some- 
thing more than nominal again. If the regulated value of a guinea, 
for example, was either reduced to twenty, or raised to two-and- 
twenty shillings, all accounts being kept and almost all obligations 
for debt being expressed in silver money, the greater part of pay- 
ments could in either case be made with the same quantity of silver 
money as before; but would require very different quantities of gold 
money; a greater in the one case, and a smaller in the other. Silver 
would appear to be more invariable in its value than gold. Silver 
would appear to measure the value of gold, and gold would not ap- 
pear to measure the value of silver. The value of gold would seem to 
depend upon the quantity of silver which it would exchange for; 
and the value of silver would not seem to depend upon the quantity 
of gold which it would exchange for. This difference, however, 
would be altogether owing to the custom of keeping accounts, and 
of expressing the amount of all great and small sums rather in silver 

^The Act, 19 Hen. VII., c. S, ordered that certain gold coins should pass 
for the sums for which they were coined, and 5 and 6 Ed. VI, prescribed pen- 
alties for giving or taking more than was warranted by proclamation. The 
value of the guinea was supposed to be fixed by the proclamation of 1717, for 
which see Economic Journal, March, 1898. Lead tokens were coined by indi- 
viduaJs in the reign of Elizabeth, James 1 . coined copper farthing tokens, but 
abstdned from proclaiming them as money of that value. In 1672 copper half- 
pennies were issued, and both halfpennies and farthings were ordered to pass 
as money of those values in all payments under sixpence.— Harris, Money md 
Coins, pt. i., § 39; Liverpool, Treatise on the Coins of the Realm, 1803, pp, 
130, 131. 

®^Ed, I reads “sum.” 

if 21 pounds may be paid with 420 silver shillings or with gold guin- 
eas it does not matter whether a “pound” properly signifies 20 silver shillings 
or I? of a gold guinea. 



REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 4 i 

than in gold money. One of Mr. Drummond’s notes for five-and- 
twenty or fifty guineas would, after an alteration of this kind, be 
still payable with five-and-twenty or fifty guineas in the same man- 
ner as before. It would, after such an alteration, be payable with the 
same quantity of gold as before, but with very different quantities 
of silver. In the payment of such a note, gold would appear to be 
more invariable in its value than silver. Gold would appear to meas- 
ure the value of silver, and silver would not appear to measure the 
value of gold. If the custom of keeping accounts, and of expressing 
promissory notes and other obligations for money in this manner, 
should ever become general, gold, and not silver, would be consid- 
ered as the metal which was peculiarly the standard or measure of 
value. 

In reality, during the continuance of any one regulated propor- 
tion, between the respective values of the different metals in coin, 
the value of the most precious metal regulates the value of the 
whole coin.®^ Twelve copper pence contain half a pound, avoirdu- 
pois, of copper, of not the best quality, which, before it is coined, is 
seldom worth seven-pence in silver. But as by the regulation twelve 
such pence are ordered to exchange for a shilling, they are in the 
market considered as worth a shilling, and a shilling can at any time 
be had for them. Even before the late reformation of the gold coin 
of Great Britain,^^ the gold, that part of it at least which circulated 
in London and its neighbourhood, was in general less degraded be- 
low its standard weight than the greater part of the silver. One-and- 
twenty worn and defaced shillings, however, were considered as 
equivalent to a guinea, which perhaps, indeed, was worn and de- 
faced too, but seldom so much so. The late regulations®® have 
brought the gold coin as near perhaps to its standard weight as it is 
possible to bring the current coin of any nation; and the order, to 
receive no gold at the public offices but by weight, is likely to pre- 
serve it so, as long as that order is enforced. The silver coin still con- 
tinues in the same worn and degraded state as before the reforma- 
tion of the gold coin. In the market, however, one-and-twenty shill- 
ings of this degraded silver coin are still considered as worth a 
guinea of this excellent gold coin. 

“ This happens to have been usually, though not always, true, but it is so 
simply because it has usually happened that the most precious metal in use as 
money has been made or become the standard. Gold was already the standard 
in England, though the fact was not generally recognised; see Harris, Money 
and CoinSj pt. ii., §§ 36, 37, and below, pp. 519-522. 

**In 1774. 

These regulations, issued in 1774, provided that guineas should not pass 
when they had lost a certain portion of their weight, varying with their age — 
Liverpool, Coins of the Realm, p. 216, note. 


During 
the con- 
tinuance 
of a regu- 
lated pro- 
portion, 
the value 
of the 
most 
precious 
metal 
regulates 
the value 
of the 
whole 
coinage, 
as in 
Great 
Britain, 



where the 
reforma- 
tion of the 
gold coin 
has raised 
the value 
of the sil- 
ver coin. 


42 the wealth of nations 

The reformation of the gold coin has evidently raised the value of 
the silver coin which can be exchanged for it. 

In the English mint a pound weight of gold is coined into forty- 
four guineas and a half, which, at one-and-twenty shillings the 
guinea, is equal to forty-six pounds fourteen shillings and six-pence. 
An ounce of such gold coin, therefore, is worth ^l.ij s.io^d, in sil- 
ver. In England no duty or seignorage is paid upon the coinage, and 
he who carries a pound weight or an ounce weight of standard gold 
bullion to the mint, gets back a pound weight or an ounce weight of 
gold in coin, without any deduction. Three pounds seventeen shill- 
ings and ten-pence halfpenny an ounce, therefore, is said to be the 
mint price of gold in England, or the quantity of gold coin which 
the mint gives in return for standard gold bullion. 

Before the reformation of the gold coin, the price of standard 
gold bullion in the market had for many years been upwards of 3 L 
18 s. sometimes 3 L 19 s. and very frequently 4 1 . an ounce; that 
sum, it is probable, in the worn and degraded gold coin, seldom con- 
taining more than an ounce of standard gold. Since the reformation 
of the gold coin, the market price of standard gold bullion seldom 
exceeds 3 /. 1 7 5. 7 d. an ounce. Before the reformation of the gold 
coin, the market price was always more or less above the mint price. 
Since that reformation, the market price has been constantly below 
the mint price. But that market price is the same whether it is paid 
in gold or in silver coin. The late reformation of the gold coin, there- 
fore, has raised not only the value of the gold coin, but likewise that 
of the silver coin in proportion to gold bullion, and probably too in 
proportion to all other commodities; though the price of the greater 
part of other commodities being influenced by so many other 
causes, the rise in the value either of gold or silver coin in propor- 
tion to them, may not be so distinct and sensible. 

In the English mint a pound weight of standard silver bullion is 
coined into sixty-two shillings, containing, in the same manner, a 
pound weight of standard silver. Five shillings and two-pence an 
ounce, therefore, is said to be the mint price of silver in England, or 
the quantity of silver coin which the mint gives in return for stan- 
dard silver bullion. Before the reformation of the gold coin, the 
market price of' standard silver bullion was, upon different occa- 
sions, five shillings and four-pence, five shillings and five-pence, five 
shillings and six-pence, five shillings and seven-pence, and very 
often five shillings and eight-pence an ounce. Five shillings and 
seven-pence, however, seems to have been the most common price. 
Since the reformation of the gold coin, the market price of standard 
silver bullion has fallen occasionally to five shillings and three- 



43 


REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 

pence, five shillings and four-pence, and five shillings and five-pence 
an ounce, which last price it has scarce ever exceeded. Though the 
market price of silver bullion has fallen considerably since the re- 
formation of the gold coin, it has not fallen so low as the mint price. 

In the proportion between the different metals in the English 
coin, as copper is rated very much above its real value, so silver is 
rated somewhat below it. In the market of Europe, in the French 
coin and in the Dutch coin, an ounce of fine gold exchanges for 
about fourteen ounces of fine silver. In the English coin, it ex- 
changes for about fifteen ounces, that is, for more silver than it is 
worth according to the common estimation of Europe.^® But as the 
price of copper in bars is not, even in England, raised by the high 
price of copper in English coin, so the price of silver in bullion is 
not sunk by the low rate of silver in English coin. Silver in bullion 
still preserves its proper proportion to gold; for the same reason 
that copper in bars preserves its proper proportion to silver.®^ 

Upon the reformation of the silver coin in the reign of William 
III. the price of silver bullion still continued to be somewhat above 
the mint price. Mr. Locke imputed this high price to the permis- 
sion of exporting silver bullion, and to the prohibition of exporting 
silver coin.®® This permission of exporting, he said, rendered the 
demand for silver bullion greater than the demand for silver coin. 
But the number of people who want silver coin for the common 
uses of buying and selling at home, is surely much greater than that 
of those who want silver bullion either for the use of exportation or 
for any other use. There subsists at present a like permission of ex- 
porting gold bullion, and a like prohibition of exporting gold coin; 
and yet the price of gold bullion has fallen below the mint price. 
But in the English coin silver was then, in the same manner as now, 
under-rated in proportion to gold; and the gold coin (which at that 
time too was not supposed to require any reformation) regulated 
then, as well as now, the real value of the whole coin. As the reform- 
ation of the silver coin did not then reduce the price of silver bul- 

®®Magens, Universal Merchant, ed. Horsley, 1733, pp. 53-53, gives the pro- 
portions thus: French coin, i to Dutch, i to Him hi English, i to 

i$imi 

®^Full weight silver coins would not remain m circulation, as the bullion in 
them was worth more reckoned in guineas and in the ordinary old and worn 
silver coins than the nominal amount stamped on them. 

Locke, Further Considerations Concerning Raising the Value of Money, 
2nd ed., 1695, pp. 58-60. The exportation of foreign coin (misprinted ‘‘kind” 
in Pickering) or bullion of gold or silver was permitted by 15 Car. II , c 7, on 
the ground that it was “found by experience that” money and bullion were 
“carried in greatest abundance (as to a common market) to such places as give 
free liberty for exporting the same” and in order “the better to keep in and 
increase the current coins” of the kingdom. 


Silver is 
rated be- 
low its 
value in 
England. 


Locke’s 
explana- 
tion of the 
high price 
of silver 
bullion is 
wrong. 



If the sil- 
ver coin 
were re- 
formed, it 
would be 
melted. 


Silver 
ought to 
be rated 
higher 
and 
should 
not be le- 
gal tender 
for more 
than a 
guinea. 


If it were 
properly 
rated, sil- 
ver bul- 
lion 

would fall 
below the 
mint price 
without 
any re- 
coinage. 


44 the wealth of NATIONS 

lion to the mint price, it is not very probable that a like reformation 
will do so now. 

Were the silver coin brought back as near to its standard weight 
as the gold, a guinea, it is probable, would, according to the present 
proportion, exchange for more silver in coin than it would purchase 
in bullion. The silver coin containing its full standard weight, there 
would in this case be a profit in melting it down, in order, first, to 
sell the bullion for gold coin, and afterwards to exchange this gold 
coin for silver coin to be melted down in the same manner. Some 
alteration in the present proportion seems to be the only method of 
preventing this inconveniency. 

The inconveniency perhaps would be less if silver was rated in 
the coin as much above its proper proportion to gold as it is at pres- 
ent rated below it; provided it was at the same time enacted that 
silver should not be a legal tender for more than the change of a 
guinea; in the same manner as copper is not a legal tender for more 
than the change of a shilling. No creditor could in this case be 
cheated in consequence of the high valuation of silver in coin; as no 
creditor can at present be cheated in consequence of the high valu- 
ation of copper. The bankers only would suffer by this regulation. 
When a run comes upon them they sometimes endeavour to gain 
time by paying in six-pences, and they would be precluded by this 
regulation from this discreditable method of evading immediate 
payment. They would be obliged in consequence to keep at all 
times in their coffers a greater quantity of cash than at present; 
and though this might no doubt be a considerable inconveniency to 
them, it would at the same time be a considerable security to their 
creditors.^^ 

Three pounds seventeen shillings and ten-pence halfpenny (the 
mint price of gold) certainly does not contain, even in our present 
excellent gold coin, more than an ounce of standard gold, and it 
may be thought, therefore, should not purchase more standard bul- 
lion. But gold in coin is more convenient than gold in bullion, and 
though, in England, the coinage is free, yet the gold which is car- 
ried in bullion to the mint, can seldom be^returned in coin to the 
owner till after a delay of several weeks. In the present hurry of the 
mint, it could not be returned till after a delay of several months. 
This delay is equivalent to a small duty, and renders gold in coin 
somewhat more valuable than an equal quantity of gold in bul- 

Harris, writing nearly twenty years earlier, had said, “it would be a ri- 
diculous and vain attempt to make a standard integer of gold, whose parts 
should be silver; or to make a motley standard, part gold and part silver.”— 
Money and Coins, pt. i., § 36 . 



45 


REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE 

lion.^^ If in the English coin silver was rated according to its proper 
proportion to gold, the price of silver bullion would probably fall 
below the mint price even without any reformation of the silver 
coin; the value even of the present worn and defaced silver coin be- 
ing regulated by the value of the excellent gold coin for which it 
can be changed. 

A small seignorage or duty upon the coinage of both gold and sil- 
ver would probably increase still more the superiority of those 
metals in coin above an equal quantity of either of them in bullion. 
The coinage would in this case increase the value of the metal 
coined in proportion to the extent of this small duty; for the same 
reason that the fashion increases the value of plate in proportion to 
the price of that fashion. The superiority of coin above bullion 
would prevent the melting down of the coin, and would discourage 
its exportation. If upon any public exigency it should become 
necessary to export the coin, the greater part of it would soon re- 
turn again of its own accord. Abroad it could sell only for its 
weight in bullion. At home it would buy more than that weight. 
There would be a profit, therefore, in bringing it home again. In 
France a seignorage of about eight per cent, is imposed upon the 
coinage, and the French coin, when exported, is said to return 
home again of its own accord."^^ 

The occasional fluctuations in the market price of gold and sil- 
ver bullion arise from the same causes as the like fluctuations in 
that of all other commodities. The frequent loss of those metals 
from various accidents by sea and by land, the continual waste of 
them in gilding and plating, in lace and embroidery, in the wear 
and tear of coin, and in that of plate require, in all countries 
which possess no mines of their own, a continual importation, in 
order to repair this loss and this waste. The merchant importers, 
like all other merchants, we may believe, endeavour, as well as they 
can, to suit their occasional importations to what, they judge, is 
likely to be the immediate demand. With all their attention, how- 
ever, they sometimes over-do the business, and sometimes under- 
do it. When they import more bullion than is wanted, rather than 
incur the risk and trouble of exporting it again, they are some- 

an ounce of standard gold would not actually fetch £3 17s. 10 Jd. if 
sold for cash down. 

" This erroneous statement is repeated below, pp. 445, and on p. 518, where 
the calculations on which it is based are given. See the note on that passage. 
The question of seignorage is further discussed at some length in the chap- 
ter on Commercial Treaties, pp. 516-522. 

Ed I reads “m the tear and wear of coin, and in the tear and wear of 
plate.” 


A seignor- 
age would 
prevent 
melting 
and dis- 
courage 
exporta- 
tion. 


Fluctua- 
tions in 
the mar- 
ket price 
of gold 
and silver 
are due to 
ordinary 
commer- 
cial causes, 
but steady 
diver- 
gence 
from mint 
price is 
due to the 
state of 
the coin. 



The price 
of goods 
is adjust- 
ed to the 
actual 
contents 
of the 
coinage 


46 the wealth of nations 

times willing to sell a part of it for something less than the ordin- 
ary or average price. When, on the other hand, they import less 
than is wanted, they get something more than this price. But when, 
under all those occasional fluctuations, the market price either of 
gold or silver bullion continues for several years together steadily 
and constantly, either more or less above, or more or less below the 
mint price: we may be assured that this steady and constant, 
either superiority or inferiority of price, is the effect of something 
in the state of the coin, which, at that time, renders a certain quant- 
ity of coin either of more value or of less value than the precise 
quantity of bullion which it ought to contain. The constancy and 
steadiness of the effect, supposes a proportionable constancy and 
steadiness in the cause. 

The money of any particular country is, at any particular time 
and place, more or less an accurate measure of value according as 
the current coin is more or less exactly agreeable to its standard, or 
contains more or less exactly the precise quantity of pure gold or 
pure silver which it ought to contain. If in England, for example, 
forty-four guineas and a half contained exactly a pound weight of 
standard gold, or eleven ounces of fine gold and one ounce of alloy, 
the gold coin of England would be as accurate a measure of the 
actual value of goods at any particular time and place as the na- 
ture of the thing would admit. But if, by rubbing and wearing, 
forty-four guineas and a half generally contain less than a pound 
weight of standard gold; the diminution, however, being greater in 
some pieces than in others; the measure of value comes to be liable 
to the same sort of uncertainty to which all other weights and 
measures are commonly exposed. As it rarely happens that these 
are exactly agreeable to their standard, the merchant adjusts the 
price of his goods, as well as he can, not to what those weights and 
measures ought to be, but to what, upon an average, he finds by 
experience they actually are. In consequence of a like disorder in 
the coin, the price of goods comes, in the same manner, to be ad- 
justed, not to the quantity of pure gold or silver which the coin 
ought to contain, but to that which, upon an average, it is found 
by experience it actually does contain. 

By the money-price of goods, it is to be observed, I understand 
always the quantity of pure gold or silver for which they are sold, 
without any regard to the denomination of the coin. Six shillings 
and eight-pence, for example, in the time of Edward I, I consider 
as the same money-price with a pound sterling in the present 
times; because it contained, as nearly as we can judge, the same 
quantity of pure silver. 



t 


CHAPTER VI 

OF THE COMPONENT PARTS OF THE PRICE OF COMMODITIES 

In that early and rude state of society which precedes both the 
accumulation of stock and the appropriation of land, the propor- 
tion between the quantities of labour necessary for acquiring dif- 
ferent objects seems to be the only circumstance which can afford 
any rule for exchanging them for one another. If among a nation 
of hunters, for example, it usually costs twice the labour to kill a 
beaver which it does to kill a deer, one beaver should naturally ex- 
change for or be worth two deer. It is natural that what is usually 
the produce of two days or two hours labour, should be worth 
double of what is usually the produce of one day^s or one hour’s 
labour. 

If the one species of labour should be more severe than the 
other, some allowance will naturally be made for this superior 
hardship; and the produce of one hour’s labour in the one way may 
frequently exchange for that of two hours labour in the other. 

Or if the one species of labour requires an uncommon degree of 
dexterity and ingenuity, the esteem which men have for such tal- 
ents, will naturally give a value to their produce, superior to what 
would be due to the time employed about it. Such talents can sel- 
dom be acquired buf in consequence of long application, and the 
superior value of their produce may frequently be no more than a 
reasonable compensation for the time and labour which must be 
spent in acquiring them. In the advanced state of society, allow- 
ances of this kind, for superior hardship and superior skill, are 
commonly made in the wages of labour; and something of the same 
kind must probably have taken place in its earliest and rudest 
period. 

In this state of things, the whole produce of labour belongs to 
the labourer; and ^ the quantity of labour commonly employed in 
acquiring or producing any commodity, is the only circumstance 

^ Ed. I does not contain “the whole produce of labour belongs to the la- 
bourer , and.” The words, however, occur in all eds. at p. 64 below. 

47 


Quantity 
of labour 
is origin- 
ally the 
only rule 
of value, 


allowance 
being 
made for 
superior 
hardship, 

and for 
uncom- 
mon dex- 
terity and 
ingenuity, 


The whole 
produce 
then be- 
longs to 



the la- 
bourer, 

but when 
stock is 
used, 

something 
must be 
given for 
the profits 
of the un- 
dertaker, 
and the 
value of 
work re- 
solves it- 
self into 
wages and 
profits. 


Profits are 
not mere- 
ly wages 
of inspec- 
tion and 
direction. 


48 the wealth oe nations 

which can regulate the quantity of labour which it ought commonly 
to purchase, command, or exchange for. 

As soon as stock has accumulated in the hands of particular per- 
sons, some of them will naturally employ it in setting to work in 
dustrious people, whom they will supply with materials and sub- 
sistence, in order to make a profit by the sale of their work, or by 
what their labour adds to the value of the materials. In exchanging 
the complete manufacture either for money, for labour, or for othei 
goods, over and above what may be sufficient to pay the price of 
the materials, and the wages of the workmen, something must be 
given for the profits of the undertaker of the work who hazards his 
stock in this adventure. The value which the workmen add to the 
materials, therefore, resolves itself in this case into two parts, of 
which the one pays their wages, the other the profits of their em- 
ployer upon the whole stock of materials and wages which he ad- 
vanced. He could have no interest to employ them, unless he ex- 
pected from the sale of their work something more than what was 
sufficient to replace his stock to him; and he could have no interest 
to employ a great stock rather than a small one, unless his profits 
were to bear some proportion to the extent of his stock. 

The profits of stock, it may perhaps be thought, are only a dif- 
ferent name for the wages of a particular sort of labour, the labour 
of inspection and direction. They are, however, altogether differ- 
ent, are regulated by quite sufficient principles, and bear no pro- 
portion to the quantity, the hardship, or the ingenuity of this sup- 
posed labour of inspection and direction. They are regulated 
altogether by the value of the stock employed, and are greater or 
smaller in proportion to the extent of this stock. Let us suppose, 
for example, that in some particular place, where the common 
annual profits of manufacturing stock are ten per cent, there are 
two different manufactures, in each of which twenty workmen are 
employed at the rate of fifteen pounds a year each, or at the ex- 
pence of three hundred a year in each manufactory. Let us suppose 
too, that the coarse materials annually wrought up in the one cost 
only seven hundred pounds, while the finer materials in the other 
cost seven thousand. The capital annually employed ^ in the one 
will in this case amount only to one thousand pounds; whereas 
that employed in the other will amount to seven thousand three 
hundred pounds. At the rate of ten per cent, therefore, the under- 
taker of the one will expect an yearly profit of about one hundred 
pounds only; while that of the other will expect about seven hun- 

““The capital annually employed” is the working expenses for twelve 
months, not the capital in the usual modem sense. 



COMPONENT PARTS OF PRICE 49 

dred and thirty pounds. But though their profits are so very differ- 
ent, their labour of inspection and direction may be either alto- 
gether or very nearly the same. In many great works, almost the 
whole labour of this kind is ^ committed to some principal clerk. 
His wages properly express the value of this labour of inspection 
and direction. Though in settling them some regard is had com- 
monly, not only to his labour and skill, but to the trust which is 
reposed in him, yet they never bear any regular proportion to the 
capital of which he oversees the management; and the owner of 
this capital, though he is thus discharged of almost all labour, still 
expects that his profits should bear a regular proportion to his 
capital.^ In the price of commodities, therefore, the profits of stock 
constitute a component part ° altogether different from the wages 
of labour, and regulated by quite different principles. 

In this state of things, the whole produce of labour does not al- 
ways belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with 
the owner of the stock which employs him. Neither is the quantity 
of labour commonly employed in acquiring or producing any com- 
modity, the only circumstance ® which can regulate the quantity 
which it ought commonly to purchase, command, or exchange for. 
An additional quantity, it is evident, must be due for the profits of 
the stock which advanced the wages and furnished the materials of 
that labour. 

As soon as the land of any country has all become private prop- 
erty, the landlords, like all other men, love to reap where they 
never sowed,'^ and demand a rent even for its natural produce. The 
wood of the forest, the grass of the field, and all the natural fruits 
of the earth, which, when land was in common, cost the labourer 
only the trouble of gathering them, come, even to him,® to have an 
additional price fixed upon them. He must give up to the landlord 
a portion of what his labour either collects or produces. This por- 
tion, or, what comes to the same thing, the price of this portion, 
constitutes the rent of land, and in the price of the greater part of 
commodities makes a third component part.® 

® Ed. I inserts “frequently.” * Eds. i and 2 read “proportion to it.” 

® Ed. I reads “profits of stock are a source of value.” 

®Ed. I reads from the beginning of the paragraph: “In this state of things, 
therefore, the quantity of labour commonly employed in acquiring or produc- 
ing any commodity is by no means the only circumstance.” 

^ Buchanan, ed. Wealth of Nations, 1814, vol. i., p. 80, says: “They do so. 
But the question is why this apparently unreasonable demand is so generally 
complied with. Other men love also to reap where they never sowed, but the 
landlords alone, it would appear, succeed in so desirable an object.” 

® Ed. I does not contain “the labourer” and “even to him.” 

‘^Ed. I in place of these two sentences reads: “Men must then pay for the 
licence to gaSier them; and in exchanging them either for money, for labour, 


The la- 
bourer 
shares 
with the 
employer, 
and la- 
bour 
alone no 
longer 
regulates 
value. 

When 
land has 
all become 
private 
property, 
rent con- 
stitutes a 
third 
compo- 
nent part 
of the 
price of 
most 

commodi- 

ties. 



50 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


The real 
value of 
all three 
parts is 
measured 
by labour 


In an im- 
proved 
society all 
three 
parts are 
generally 
present, 

for ex- 
ample, in 
corn, 


The real value of all the different component parts of price, it 
must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which 
they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures 
the value not only of that part of price which resolves itself into 
labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which 
resolves itself into profit. 

In every society the price of every commodity finally resolves it- 
self into some one or other, or all of those three parts; and in every 
improved society, all the three enter more or less, as component 
parts, into the price of the far greater part of commodities. 

In the price of corn, for example, one part pays the rent of the 
landlord, another pays the wages or maintenance of the labourers 
and labouring cattle employed in producing it, and the third 
pays the profit of the farmer. These three parts seem either im- 
mediately or ultimately to make up the whole price of corn. A 
fourth part, it may perhaps be thought, is necessary for replacing 
the stock of the farmer, or for compensating the wear and tear of 
his labouring cattle, and other Instruments of husbandry. But it 
must be considered that the price of any instrument of husbandry, 
such as a labouring horse, is itself made up of the same three parts; 
the rent of the land upon which he is reared, the labour of tending 
and rearing him, and the profits of the farmer who advances both 
the rent of this land, and the wages of this labour. Though the 
price of the corn, therefore, may pay the price as well as the main- 
tenance of the horse, the whole price still resolves itself either im- 
mediately or ultimately into the same three parts of rent, labour,^® 
and profit. 

or for other goods, over and above what is due, both for the labour of gath- 
ering them, and for the profits of the stock which employs that labour, some 
allowance must be made for the price of the licence, which constitutes the first 
rent of land. In the price therefore of the greater part of commodities the rent 
of land comes in this manner to constitute a third source of value. In this state 
of things, neither the quantity of labour commonly employed in acquiring or 
producing any commodity, nor the profits of the stock which advanced the 
wages and furnished the materials of that labour, are the only circumstances 
which can regulate the quantity of labour which it ought commonly to pur- 
chase, command or exchange for. A third circumstance must likewise be taken 
into consideration ; the rent of the land ; and the commodity must commonly 
purchase, command or exchange for, an additional quantity of labour, in order 
to enable the person who brings it to market to pay this rent.” 

^®Ed. I reads “The real value of all the different component parts of price 
is in this manner measured.” 

“ Smith overlooks the fact that his inclusion of the maintenance of labour- 
ing cattle here as a sort of wages requires him to include it in the national in- 
come or “wealth of the nation,” and therefore to reckon the cattle themselves 
as part of the nation. 

Ed. I reads “tear and wear.” 

The use of “labour” instead of the more natural “wages” here is more 



COMPONENT PARTS OF PRICE 5 ^ 

In the price of flour or meal, we must add to the price of the 
corn, the profits of the miller, and the wages of his servants; in the 
price of bread, the profits of the baker, and the wages of his serv- 
ants; and in the price of both, the labour of transporting the corn 
from the house of the farmer to that of the miller, and from that of 
the miller to that of the baker, together with the profits of those 
who advance the wages of that labour. 

The price of flax resolves itself into the same three parts as that 
of corn. In the price of linen we must add to this price the wages of 
the flax-dresser, of the spinner, of the weaver, of the bleacher, &c. 
together with the profits of their respective employers. 

As any particular commodity comes to be more manufactured, 
that part of the price which resolves itself into wages and profit, 
comes to be greater in proportion to that which resolves itself into 
rent. In the progress of the manufacture, not only the number of 
profits increase, but every subsequent profit is greater than the 
foregoing; because the capital from which it is derived must always 
be greater. The capital which employs the weavers, for example, 
must be greater than that which employs the spinners; because it 
not oqly replaces that capital with its profits, but pays, besides, the 
wages of the weavers; and the profits must always bear some pro- 
portion to the capital.^^ 

In the most improved societies, however, there are always a few 
commodities of which the price resolves itself into two parts only, 
the wages of labour, and the profits of stock; and a still smaller 
number, in which it consists altogether in the wages of labour. In 
the price of sea-fish, for example, one part pays the labour of the 
fishermen, and the other the profits of the capital employed in the 
fishery. Rent very seldom makes any part of it, though it does 
sometimes, as I shall shew hereafter.^® It is otherwise, at least 
through the greater part of Europe, in river fisheries. A salmon 
fishery pays a rent, and rent, though it cannot well be called the 
rent of land, makes a part of the price of a salmon as well as wages 
and profit. In some parts of Scotland a few poor people make a 
trade of gathering, along the sea-shore, those little variegated 
stones commonly known by the name of Scotch Pebbles. The price 

probably the result of its use five lines higher up than of any feeling of diffi- 
culty about the maintenance of cattle. On p. 56 below “rent, labour and prof- 
it” and “rent, wages and profit” are both used; see below, p. 316, and note. 
The fact that the later manufacturer has to replace what is here called the 
capital, ie., the periodical expenditure of the earlier manufacturer, does not 
necessarily require him to have a greater capital to deal with the same prod- 
uce. It need not be greater if he requires less machinery and buildings and a 
smaller stock of materials. 

“ Below, p. 143. 


in flour or 
meal. 


and in 
flax 


Rent is a 
smaller 
propor- 
tion in 
highly 
manufac- 
tured 
commodi- 
ties 


A few 
commodi- 
ties have 
only two 
or even 
one of the 
three 
compo- 
nent 
parts. 



But all 
must have 
at least 
one, 


and the 
price of 
the whole 
annual 
produce 
resolves 
itself into 
wages, 
profits 
and rent, 


which are 
the only 
original 
kinds of 
revenue. 


52 the wealth of nations 

which is paid to them by the stone-cutter is altogether the wages of 
their labour; neither rent nor profit make any part of it. 

But the whole price of any commodity must still finally resolve 
itself into some one or other, or all of those three parts; as whatever 
part of it remains after paying the rent of the land, and the price 
of the whole labour employed in raising, manufacturing, and bring- 
ing it to market, must necessarily be profit to somebody.^^ 

As the price or exchangeable value of every particular commod- 
ity, talcen separately, resolves itself into some one or other, or all of 
those three parts; so that of all the commodities which compose 
the whole annual produce of the labour of every country, taken 
complexly, must resolve itself into the same three parts, and be 
parcelled out among different inhabitants of the country, either as 
the wages of their labour, the profits of their stock, or the rent of 
their land.^*^ The whole of what is annually either collected or pro- 
duced by the labour of every society, or what comes to the same 
thing, the whole price of it, is in this manner originally distributed 
among some of its different members. Wages, profit, and rent, are 
the three original sources of all revenue as well as of all exchange- 
able value. All othpr revenue is ultimately derived from some 
one or other of these. 

Whoever derives his revenue from a fund which is his own, must 
draw it either from his labour, from his stock, or from his land. 
The revenue derived from labour is called wages. That derived 
from stock, by the person who manages or employs it, is called 
profit. That derived from it by the person who does not employ it 
himself, but lends it to another, is called the interest or the use of 
money. It is the compensation which the borrower pays to the 
lender, for the profit which he has an opportunity of making by 
the use of the money. Part of that profit naturally belongs to the 
borrower, who runs the risk and t^es the trouble of employing 
it; and part to the lender, who affords him the opportunity of mak- 
ing this profit. The interest of money is always a derivative rev- 
enue, which, if it is not paid from the profit which is made by the 
use of the money, must be paid from some other source of rev- 
enue, unless perhaps the borrower is a spendthrift, who contracts 

Only true if “commodity” be understood to include solely goods which 
constitute income. 

The “whole annual produce” must be taken to mean the income and not 
the whole mass of goods produced, including those which perish or are used 
up in the creation of others. 

^ Some parts of this “other revenue,” viz,, interest and taxes, are mentioned 
in the next paragraph. It is perhaps also intended to include the rent of 
houses; see below, pp. 264, 265. 



COMPONENT PARTS OF PRICE 53 

a second debt in order to pay the interest of the first. The revenue 
which proceeds altogether from land, is called rent, and belongs to 
the landlord. The revenue of the farmer is derived partly from his 
labour, and partly from his stock. To him, land is only the instru- 
ment which enables him to earn the wages of this labour, and to 
make the profits of this stock. All taxes, and all the revenue which 
is founded upon them, all salaries, pensions, and annuities of every 
kind, are ultimately derived from some one or other of those three 
original sources of revenue, and are paid either immediately or 
mediately from the wages of labour, the profits of stock, or the rent 
of land. 

When those three different sorts of revenue belong to different 
persons, they are readily distinguished; but when they belong to 
the same they are sometimes confounded with one another, at least 
in common language. 

A gentleman who farms a part of his own estate, after paying the 
expence of cultivation, should gain both the rent of the landlord 
and the profit of the farmer. He is apt to denominate, however, his 
whole gain, profit, and thus confounds rent with profit, at least in 
common language. The greater part of our North American and 
West Indian planters are in this situation. They farm, the greater 
part of them, their own estates, and accordingly we seldom hear of 
the rent of a plantation, but frequently of its profit. 

Common farmers seldom employ any overseer to direct the gen- 
eral operations of the farm. They generally too work a good deal 
with their own hands, as ploughmen, harrowers, &c. What remains 
of the crop after paying the rent, therefore, should not only replace 
to them their stock employed in cultivation, together with its ordi- 
nary profits, but pay them the wages which are due to them, both 
as labourers and overseers. Whatever remains, however, after pay- 
ing the rent and keeping up the stock, is called profit. But wages 
evidently make a part of it. The farmer, by saving these wages, 
must necessarily gain them. Wages, therefore, are in this case con- 
founded with profit. 

An independent manufacturer, who has stock enough both to 
purchase materials, and to maintain himself till he can carry his 
work to market, should gain both the wages of a journeyman who 
works under a master, and the profit which that master makes by 
the sale of the journeyman’s work.^® His whole gains, however, are 
commonly called profit, and wages are, in this case too, confounded 
with profit.^® 

A gardener who cultivates his own garden with his own hands, 
^ Ed. I reads “sale of his work.” “ Below, pp. 111-113. 


They are 
sometimes 
con- 
founded, 

for ex- 
ample, a 
gentle- 
man 
farmer^s 
rent is 
called 
profit, 


a common 
farmer’s 
wages 
are called 
profit, 


and so are 
an inde- 
pendent 
manufac- 
turer’s 
wages, 


while the 
rent and 



54 


profit of a 
gardener 
cultivat- 
ing his 
own land 
are con- 
sidered 
earnings 
of labour. 

A great 
part of 
the an- 
nual pro- 
duce goes 
to the 
idle; the 
propor- 
tion regu- 
lates the 
increase 
or dimi- 
nution of 
the pro- 
duce. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

unites in his own person the three different characters, of landlord, 
farmer, and labourer. His produce, therefore, should pay him the 
rent of the first, the profit of the second, and the wages of the third. 
The whole, however, is commonly considered as the earnings of 
his labour. Both rent and profit are, in this case, confounded with 
wages. 

As in a civilized country there are but few commodities of which 
the exchangeable value arises from labour only, rent and profit 
contributing largely to that of the far greater part of them, so the 
annual produce of its labour will always be sufficient to purchase 
or command a much greater quantity of labour than what was em- 
ployed in raising, preparing, and bringing that produce to market. 
If tibe society were annudly to employ all the labour which it 
can annually purchase, as the quantity of labour would increase 
greatly every year, so the produce of every succeeding year would 
be of vastly greater value than that of the foregoing. But there is 
no country in which the whole annual produce is employed in main- 
taining the industrious. The idle every where consume a great part 
of it; and according to the different proportions in which it is an- 
nually divided between those two different orders of people, its 
ordinary or average value must either annually increase, or dimin- 
ish, or continue the same from one year to another. 

^ Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 


t 



CHAPTER VII 


OF THE NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE OF COMMODITIES^ 

There is in every society or neighbourhood an ordinary or aver- 
age rate both of wages and profit in every different employment of 
labour and stock. This rate is naturally regulated, as I shall show 
hereafter, 2 partly by the general circumstances of the society, their 
riches or poverty, their advancing, stationary, or declining con- 
dition; and partly by the particular nature of each employment. 

There is likewise in every society or neighbourhood an ordinary 
or average rate of rent, which is regulated too, as I shall show here- 
after,^ partly by the general circumstances of the society or neigh- 
bourhood in which the land is situated, and partly by the natural 
or improved fertility of the land. 

These ordinary or average rates may be called the natural rates 
of wages, profit, and rent, at the time and place in which they 
commonly prevail. 

When the price of any commodity is neither more nor less than 
what is sufficient to pay the rent of the land, the wages of the 
labour, and the profits of the stock employed in raising, preparing, 
and bringing it to market, according to their natural rates, the 
commodity is then sold for what may be called its natural price. 

The commodity is then sold precisely for what it is worth, or for 
what it really costs the person who brings it to market; for though 
in common language what is called the prime cost of any commod- 
ity does not comprehend the profit of the person who is to sell it 
again, yet if he sells it at a price which does not allow him the 
ordinary rate of profit in his neighbourhood, he is evidently a loser 
by the trade; since by employing his stock in some other way he 
might have made that profit. His profit, besides, is his revenue, the 
proper fund of his subsistence. As, while he is preparing and bring- 
ing the goods to market, he advances to his workmen their wages, 
or their subsistence; so he advances to himself, in the same manner, 

^ The chapter follows Lectures, pp. 173-182, very closely. 

® Below, chaps, viii. and ix. ® Below, chap. xi. 


Ordinary 
or average 
rates of 
wages, 
profit, 


and rent 


may be 
called 
natural 
rates, 

to pay 
which a 
commo- 
dity is 
sold at its 
natural 
price, 

or for 
what it 
really 
costs, 
which in- 
cludes 
profit, 


55 



since no 
one will 
go on sell- 
ing with- 
out profit. 


Market 

price 


is regu- 
lated by 
the quan- 
tity 

brought 
to market 
and the 
effectual 
demand. 


When the 
quantity 
brought 
falls short 
of the ef- 
fectual 
demand, 
the mar- 
ket price 
rises 

above the 
natural; 


56 the wealth of nations 

his own subsistence, which is generally suitable to the profit which 
he may reasonably expect from the sale of his goods. Unless they 
yield him this profit, therefore, they do not repay him what they 
may very properly be said to have really cost him. 

Though the price, therefore, which leaves him this profit, is not 
always the lowest at which a dealer may sometimes sell his goods, 
it is the lowest at which he is likely to sell them for any considerable 
time; at least where there is perfect liberty,^ or where he may 
change his trade as often as he pleases. 

The actual price at which any commodity is commonly sold is 
called its market price. It may either be above, or below, or exactly 
the same with its natural price. 

The market price of every particular commodity is regulated by 
the proportion between the quantity which is actually brought to 
market, and the demand of those who are willing to pay the natural 
price of the commodity, or the whole value of the rent, labour, and 
profit,^ which must be paid in order to bring it thither. Such people 
may be called the effectual demanders, and their demand the ef- 
fectual demand; since it may be sufficient to effectuate the bringing 
of the commodity to market. It is different from the absolute de- 
mand. A very poor man may be said in some sense to have a 
demand for a coach and six; he might like to have it; but his de- 
mand is not an effectual demand, as the commodity can never be 
brought to market in order to satisfy it. 

When the quantity of any commodity which is brought to market 
falls short of the effectual demand, all those who are willing to pay 
the whole value of the rent, wages, and profit, which must be paid 
in order to bring it thither, cannot be supplied with the quantity 
which they want. Rather than want it altogether, some of them will 
be willing to give more. A competition will immediately begin 
among them, and the market price will rise more or less above the 
natural price, according as either the greatness of the deficiency, or 
the wealth and wanton luxury of the competitors, happen to ani- 
mate more or less the eagerness of the competition. Among com- 
petitors of equal wealth and luxury the same deficiency ® will gen- 
erally occasion a more or less eager competition, according as the 
acquisition of the commodity happens to be of more or less im- 
portance to them.'^ Hence the exorbitant price of the necessaries of 
life during the blockade of a town or in a famine. 

* The same phrase occurs below, pp. 62, 99. ® Above, p. 50 and note 13. 

®Ed. I, beginning three lines higher up, reads “according as the greatness of 
the deficiency increases more or less the eagerness of this competition. The 
same deficiency.” 

^ Ed. I reads “the competitors.” 



NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE 57 

When the quantity brought to market exceeds the effectual de- 
mand, it cannot be all sold to those who are willing to pay the 
whole value of the rent, wages and profit, which must be paid in 
order to bring it thither. Some part must be sold to those who are 
willing to pay less, and the low price which they give for it must 
reduce the price of the whole. The market price will sink more or 
less below the natural price, according as the greatness of the ex- 
cess increases more or less the competition of the sellers, or accord- 
ing as it happens to be more or less important to them to get im- 
mediately rid of the commodity. The same excess in the importa- 
tion of perishable, will occasion a much greater competition than in 
that of durable commodities; in the importation of oranges, for ex- 
ample, than in that of old iron. 

When the quantity brought to market is just sufficient to supply 
the effectual demand and no more, the market price naturally 
comes to be either exactly, or as nearly as can be judged of, the 
same with the natural price. The whole quantity upon hand can be 
disposed of for this price, and cannot be disposed of for more. The 
competition of the different dealers obliges them all to accept of 
this price, but does not oblige them to accept of less. 

The quantity of every commodity brought to market naturally 
suits itself to the effectual demand. It is the interest of all those 
who employ their land, labour, or stock, in bringing any commod- 
ity to market, that the quantity never should exceed the effectual 
demand; and it is the interest of all other people that it never 
should fall short of that demand.® 

If at any time it exceeds the effectual demand, some of the com- 
ponent parts of its price must be paid below their natural rate. If 
it is rent, the interest of the landlords will immediately prompt 
them to withdraw a part of their land; and if it is wages or profit, 
the interest of the labourers in the one case, and of their employers 
in the other, will prompt them to withdraw a part of their labour 
or stock from this employment. The quantity brought to market 
will soon be no more than sufficient to supply the effectual demand. 
All the different parts of its price will rise to their natural rate, and 
the whole price to its natural price. 

If, on the contrary, the quantity brought to market should at 
any time fall short of the effectual demand, some of the component 
parts of its price must rise above their natural rate. If it is rent, the 
interest of all Other landlords will naturally prompt them to pre- 
pare more land for the raising of this commodity; if it is wages or 
profit, the interest of all other labourers and dealers will soon 

® Ed. I reads “fall short of it.” 


when it 
exceeds 
the effec- 
tual de- 
mand the 
market 
price falls 
below the 
natural; 


when it is 
just equal 
to the ef- 
fectual 
demand 
the mar- 
ket and 
natural 
price co- 
incide. 

It natur- 
ally suits 
itself to 
the effec- 
tual de- 
mand. 

When it 
exceeds 
that de- 
mand, 
some of 
the com- 
ponent 
parts of 
its price 
are below 
their 
natural 
rate; 

when it 
falls short, 
some of 
the com- 
ponent 
parts are 
above 
their na- 
tural rate. 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Natural 
price is 
the cen- 
tral price 
to which 
actual 
prices 
gravitate. 

Industry 
suits itself 
to the ef- 
fectual 
demand, 

but the 
quantity 
produced 
by a given 
amount of 
industry 
sometimes 
fluctuates. 


58 

prompt them to employ more labour and stock in preparing and 
bringing it to market. The quantity brought thither will soon be 
sufficient to supply the effectual demand. All the different parts of 
its price will soon sink to their natural rate, and the whole price to 
its natural price. 

The natural price, therefore, is, as it were, the central price, to 
which the prices of all commodities are continually gravitating. 
Different accidents may sometimes keep them suspended a good 
deal above it, and sometimes force them down even somewhat be- 
low it. But whatever may be the obstacles which hinder them from 
settling in this center of repose and continuance, they are con- 
stantly tending towards it. 

The whole quantity of industry annually employed in order to 
bring any commodity to market, naturally suits itself in this man- 
ner to the effectual demand. It naturally aims at bringing always 
that precise quantity thither which may be sufficient to supply, and 
no more than supply, that demand. 

But in some employments the same quantity of industry will in 
different years produce very different quantities of commodities; ® 
while in others it will produce always the same, or very nearly the 
same. The same number of labourers in husbandry will, in differ- 
ent years, produce very different quantities of corn, wine, oil, hops, 
&c. But the same number of spinners and weavers will every year 
produce the same or very nearly the same quantity of linen and 
woollen cloth. It is only the average produce of the one species of 
industry which can be suited in any respect to the effectual de- 
mand; and as its actual produce is frequently much greater and 
frequently much less than its average produce, the quantity of the 
commodities brought to market will sometimes exceed a good deal, 
and sometimes fall short a good deal, of the effectual demand. Even 
though that demand therefore should continue always the same, 
their market price will be liable to great fluctuations, will some- 
times fall a good deal below, and sometimes rise a good deal above, 
their natural price. In the other species of industry, the produce of 
equal quantities of labour being always the same, or very nearly 
the same, it can be more exactly suited to the effectual demand. 
While that demand continues the same, therefore, the market price 
of the commodities is likely to do so too, and to be either altogether, 
or as nearly as can be judged of, the same with the natural price, 
That the price of linen and woollen cloth is liable neither to such 
frequent nor to such great variations as the price of corn, every 
man^s experience will inform him. The price of the one species of 

® See below, p. ii6. 



NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE 59 

commodities varies only with the variations in the demand: That 
of the other varies not only with the variations in the demand, but 
with the much greater and more frequent variations in the quantity 
of what is brought to market in order to supply that demand. 

The occasional and temporary fluctuations in the market price of 
any commodity fall chiefly upon those parts of its price which re- 
solve themselves into wages and profit. That part which resolves 
itself into rent is less affected by them. A rent certain in money is 
not in the least affected by them either in its rate or in its value. A 
rent which consists either in a certain proportion or in a certain 
quantity of the rude produce, is no doubt affected in its yearly 
value by all the occasional and temporary fluctuations in the 
market price of that rude produce; but it is seldom affected by 
them in its yearly rate. In settling the terms of the lease, the land- 
lord and farmer endeavour, according to their best judgment, to 
adjust that rate, not to the temporary and occasional, but to the 
average and ordinary price of the produce. 

Such fluctuations affect both the value and the rate either of 
wages or of profit, according as the market happens to be either 
over-stocked or under-stocked with commodities or with labour; 
with work done, or with work to be done. A public mourning raises 
the price of black cloth (with which the market is almost always 
under-stocked upon such occasions), and augments the profits of 
the merchants who possess any considerable quantity of it. It has 
no effect upon the wages of the weavers. The market is under- 
stocked wilJi commodities, not with labour; with work done, not 
with work to be done. It raises the wages of journeymen taylors. 
The market is here under-stocked with labour. There is an effect- 
ual demand for more labour, for more work to be done than can 
be had. It sinks the price of coloured silks and cloths, and thereby 
reduces the profits of the merchants who have any considerable 
quantity of them upon hand. It sinks too the wages of the work- 
men employed in preparing such commodities, for which all de- 
mand is stopped for six months, perhaps for a twelvemonth. The 
market is here over-stocked both with commodities and with 
labour. 

But though the market price of every particular commodity is 
in this manner continually gravitating, if one may say so, towards 
the natural price, yet sometimes particular accidents, sometimes 
natural causes, and sometimes particular regulations of police, 
may, in many commodities, keep up the market price, for a long 
time together, a good deal above the natural price. 

Repeated below, p. ii6. Ed. i does not contain “more,” 


The fluc- 
tuations 
fall on 
wages and 
profit 
more than 
on rent, 


affecting 
them in 
different 
propor- 
tions ac- 
cording to 
the supply 
of com- 
modities 
and la- 
bour 


But mar- 
ket price 
maybe 
kept 

above na- 
tural for a 
long time, 



in conse- 
quence of 
want of 
general 
knowl- 
edge of 
high pro- 
fits, 


or in con- 
sequence 
of secrets 
in manif- 
factures, 


which 
may oper- 
ate for 
long peri- 
ods, 

or in con- 
sequence 
of scarcity 
of pecu- 
liar soils, 


6o the wealth of nations 

When by an increase in the effectual demand, the market price 
of some particular commodity happens to rise a good deal above 
the natural price, those who employ their stocks in supplying that 
market are generally careful to conceal this change. If it was com- 
monly known, their great profit would tempt so many new rivals 
to employ their stocks in the same way, that, the effectual demand 
being fully supplied, the market price would soon be reduced to the 
natural price, and perhaps for some time even below it. If the mar- 
ket is at a great distance from the residence of those who supply 
it, they may sometimes be able to keep the secret for several years 
together, and may so long enjoy their extraordinary profits with- 
out any new rivsds. Secrets of this kind, however, it must be ac- 
knowledged, can seldom be long kept; and the extraordinary profit 
can last very little longer than they are kept. 

Secrets in manufactures are capable of being longer kept than 
secrets in trade. A dyer who has found the means of producing a 
particular colour with materials which cost only half the price of 
those commonly made use of, may, with good management, enjoy 
the advantage of his discovery as long as he lives, and even leave 
it as a legacy to his posterity. His extraordinary gains arise from 
the high price which is paid for his private labour. They properly 
consist in the high wages of that labour. But as they are repeated 
upon every part of his stock, and as their whole amount bears, up- 
on that account, a regular proportion to it, they are commonly 
considered as extraordinary profits of stock.^^ 

Such enhancements of the market price are evidently the effects 
of particular accidents, of which, however, the operation may 
sometimes last for many years together. 

Some natural productions require such a singularity of soil and 
situation, that all the land in a great country, which is fit for pro- 
ducing them, may not be sufficient to supply the effectual demand. 
The whole quantity brought to market, therefore, may be dis- 
posed of to those who are willing to give more than what is suf- 
ficient to pay the rent of the land which produced them, together 
with the wages of the labour, and the profits of the stock which 
were employed in preparing and bringing them to market, accord- 
ing to their natural rates. Such commodities may continue for 
whole centuries together to be sold at this high price; and that 

“They are called profits simply because all the gains of the master-manu- 
facturer are called profits. They can scarcely be said to have been “consid- 
ered” at all; if they had been, they would doubtless have been pronounced to 
be, in the words of the next paragraph, “the effects of a particular accident,” 
namely, the possession of peculiar knowledge on the part of the dyer. 

^ Ed. I places “for whole centuries together” here instead of where printed. 



NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE 

part of it which resolves itself into the rent of land is in this case 
the part which is generally paid above its natural rate. The rent 
of the land which affords such singular and esteemed productions, 
like the rent of some vineyards in France of a peculiarly happy 
soil and situation, bears no regular proportion to the rent of other 
equally fertile and equally well-cultivated land in its neighbour- 
hood. The wages of the labour and the profits of the stock em- 
ployed in bringing such commodities to market, on the contrary, 
are seldom out of their natural proportion to those of the other 
employments of labour and stock in their neighbourhood. 

Such enhancements of the market price are evidently the effect which 
of natural causes which may hinder the effectual demand from ever 
being fully supplied, and which may continue, therefore, to operate ever, 
for ever. 

A monopoly granted either to an individual or to a trading com- Amono- 
pany has the same effect as a secret in trade or manufactures. The fhe^g^me 
monopolists, by keeping the market constantly under-stocked, by effect as a 
never fully supplying the effectual demand, sell their commodities trade se- 
much above the natural price, and raise their emoluments, whether 
they consist in wages or profit, greatly above their natural rate. 

The price of monopoly is upon every occasion the highest which the price 
can be got. The natural price, or the price of free competition, on pQiy 
the contrary, is the lowest which can be taken, not upon every oc- thehigh- 
casion indeed, but for any considerable time together. The one is 
upon every occasion the highest which can be squeezed out of the ^ 
buyers, or which, it is supposed, they will consent to give: The 
other is the lowest which the sellers can commonly afford to take, 
and at the same time continue their business. 

The exclusive privileges of corporations, statutes of apprentice- Corpora- 
ship,^^ and all those laws which restrain, in particular employ- leges^Sr," 
ments, the competition to a smaller number than might otherwise are en- 
go into them, have the same tendency, though in a less degree, ^^’^sed 
They are a sort of enlarged monopolies, and may frequently, for 
ages together, and in whole classes of employments, keep up the 
market price of particular commodities above the natural price, 
and maintain both the wages of the labour and the profits of the 
stock employed about them somewhat above their natural rate. 

See below, pp. 118-130. Playfair, in a note on this passage, ed. Wealth of 
Nations, 1805, vol. i., p. 97, says: “This observation about corporations and 
apprenticeships scarcely applies at all to the present day. In London, for ex- 
ample, the freemen only can carry on certain businesses within the city: there 
is not one of those businesses that may not be carried on elsewhere, and the 
produce sold in the city. If Mr. Smith’s principle applied, goods would be 
dearer in Cheapside than in Bond Street, which is not the case.” 



Market 
price is 
seldom 
long be- 
low natu- 
ral price, 


though 
appren- 
ticeship 
and cor- 
poration 
laws 

sometimes 
reduce 
wages 
much be- 
low the 
natural 
rate for a 
certain 
period. 


Natural 

price 

varies 

with the 

natural 

rate of 

wages, 


62 the wealth of nations 

Such enhancements of the market price may last as long as the 
regulations of police which give occasion to them. 

The market price of any particular commodity, though it may 
continue long above, can seldom continue long below, its natural 
price. Whatever part of it was paid below the natural rate, the 
persons whose interest it affected would immediately feel the loss, 
and would immediately withdraw either so much land, or so much 
labour, or so much stock, from being employed about it, that the 
quantity brought to market would soon be no more than sufficient 
to supply the effectual demand. Its market price, therefore, would 
soon rise to the natural price. This at least would be the case where 
there was perfect liberty 

The same statutes of apprenticeship and other corporation laws 
indeed, which, when a manufacture is in prosperity, enable the 
workman to raise his wages a good deal above their natural rate, 
sometimes oblige him, when it decays, to let them down a good 
deal below it. As in the one case they exclude many people from 
his employment, so in the other they exclude him from many em- 
ployments. The effect of such regulations, however, is not near so 
durable in sinking the workman’s wages below, as in raising them 
above, their natural rate. Their operation in the one way may en- 
dure for many centuries, but in the other it can last no longer than 
the lives of some of the workmen who were bred to the business in 
the time of its prosperity. When they are gone, the number of those 
who are afterwards educated to the trade will naturally suit itself 
to the effectual demand. The police must be as violent as that of 
Indostan or ancient Egypt (where every man was bound by a 
principle of religion to follow the occupation of his father, and was 
supposed to commit the most horrid sacrilege if he changed it for 
another), which can in any particular employment, and for several 
generations together, sink either the wages of labour or the profits 
of stock below their natural rate. 

This is all that I think necessary to be observed at present con- 
cerning the deviations, whether occasional or permanent, of the 
market price of commodities from the natural price. 

The natural price itself varies with the natural rate of each of 
its component parts, of wages, profit, and rent; and in every so- 
ciety this rate varies according to their circumstances, according 
to their riches or poverty, their advancing, stationary, or declining 
condition. I shall, in the four following chapters, endeavour to ex- 

“ Above, p. 56, and below, p. 99. 

In Lectures, p. 168, the Egyptian practice is attributed to “a law of Scsos- 
tris.” 



NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE 63 

plain, as fully and distinctly as I can, the causes of those different 
variations. 

First, I shall endeavour to explain what are the circumstances 
which naturally determine the rate of wages, and in what manner 
those circumstances are affected by the riches or poverty, by the 
advancing, stationary, or declining state of the society. 

Secondly, I shall endeavour to show what are the circumstances 
which naturally determine the rate of profit, and in what manner 
too those circumstances are affected by the like variations in the 
state of the society. 

Though pecuniary wages and profit are very different in the dif- 
ferent employments of labour and stock; yet a certain proportion 
seems commonly to take place between both the pecuniary wages 
in all the different employments of labour, and the pecuniary prof- 
its in all the different employments of stock. This proportion, it 
will appear hereafter, depends partly upon the nature of the dif- 
ferent employments, and partly upon the different laws and policy 
of the society in which they are carried on. But though in many re- 
spects dependent upon the laws and policy, this proportion seems 
to be little affected by the riches or poverty of that society; by its 
advancing, stationary, or declining condition; but to remain the 
same or very nearly the same in all those different states. I shall, in 
the third place, endeavour to explain all the different circumstances 
which regulate this proportion. 

In the fourth and last place, I shall endeavour to show what 
are the circumstances which regulate the rent of land, and which 
either raise or lower the real price of all the different substances 
which it produces. 


t 


profit and 
rent 

Wages 
will be 
dealt with 
in chapter 

viii. , 

profit in 
chapter 

ix. , 


differences 
of wages 
and profit 
in chapter 

X., 


and rent 
in chapter 
xi. 



CHAPTER VIII 


OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR 


Produced 
the natur- 
al wages 
of labour. 

Originally 
the whole 
belonged 
to the la- 
bourer. 


Ifthishad 
continued, 
all things 
would 
have be- 
come 
cheaper, 


though in 
appear- 
ance 
many 
things 
might 
have be- 
come 
dearer. 


The produce of labour constitutes the natural recompence or wages 
of labour. 

In that original state of things, which precedes both the appro- 
priation of land and the accumulation of stock, the whole produce 
of labour belongs to the labourer.^ He has neither landlord nor 
master to share with him. 

Had this state continued, the wages of labour would have aug- 
mented with all those improvements in its productive powers, to 
which the division of labour gives occasion. All things would 
gradually have become cheaper They would have been produced 
by a smaller quantity of labour; and as the commodities produced 
by equal quantities of labour would naturally in this state of things 
be exchanged for one another, they would have been purchased 
likewise with the produce of a smaller quantity. 

But though all things would have become cheaper in reality, in 
appearance many things might have become dearer than before, or 
have been exchanged for a greater quantity of other goods.^ Let us 
suppose, for example, that in the greater part of employments the 
productive powers of labour had been improved to tenfold, or that 
a day’s labour could produce ten times the quantity of work which 
it had done originally; but that in a particular employment they 
had been improved only to double, or that a day’s labour could 
produce only twice the quantity of work which it had done before. 
In exchanging the produce of a day’s labour in the greater part of 
employments, for that of a day’s labour in this particular one, ten 
times the original quantity of work in them would purchase only 

^ The same nine words occur above, p. 47, in ed. 2 and later eds. 

^The word “cheaper” is defined by the next sentence as “produced by a 
smaller quantity of labour.” 

®It would be less confusing if the sentence ran: “But though all things 
would have become cheaper in the^nse just attributed to the word, yet in the 
sense in which the words cheaper and dearer are ordinarily used many things 
might have become dearer than before.” 

64 



WAGES OF LABOUR 65 

twice the original quantity in it. Any particular quantity in it, 
therefore, a pound weight, for example, would appear to be five 
times dearer than before.'^ In reality,^ however, it would be twice 
as cheap. Though it required five times the quantity of other goods 
to purchase it, it would require only half the quantity of labour 
either to purchase or to produce it. The acquisition, therefore, 
would be twice as easy ® as before. 

But this original state of things, in which the labourer enjoyed 
the whole produce of his own labour, could not last beyond the 
first introduction of the appropriation of land and the accumulation 
of stock. It was at an end, therefore, long before the most con- 
siderable improvements were made in the productive powers of 
labour, and it would be to no purpose to trace further what might 
have been its effects upon the recompence or wages of labour. 

As soon as land becomes private property, the landlord demands 
a share of almost all the produce which the labourer can either 
raise, or collect from it. His rent makes the first deduction from 
the produce of the labour which is employed upon land. 

It seldom happens that the person who tills the ground has 
wherewithal to maintain himself till he reaps the harvest. His 
maintenance is generally advanced to him from the stock of a 
master, the farmer who employs him, and who would have no in- 
terest to employ him, unless he was to share in the produce of his 
labour, or unless his stock was to be replaced to him with a profit. 
This profit makes a second deduction from the produce of the 
labour which is employed upon land. 

The produce of almost all other labour is liable to the like de- 
duction of profit. In all arts and manufactures the greater part of 
the workmen stand in need of a master to advance them the ma- 
terials of their work, and their wages and maintenance till it be 
compleated.® He shares in the produce of their labour, or in the 
value which it adds to the materials upon which it is bestowed; and 
in this share consists his profit.® 

It sometimes happens, indeed, that a single independent work- 
man has stock sufficient both to purchase the materials of his work, 
and to maintain himself till it be compleated. He is both master 

^ I.e,, “would in the ordinary sense of the word be five times dearer than 
before.” 

^ l.e,f “in the sense attributed to the word above ” 

® If the amount of labour necessary for the acquisition of a thing measures 
its value, “twice as cheap” means simply, twice as easy to acquire. 

’ Ed. I reads “of whatever produce.” 

® The provision of tools to work with and buildings to work in is forgotten. 

® Cp. with this account that given at the beginning of chap vi., pp. 47, 48 
above. 


This state 
was ended 
by the ap- 
propria- 
tion of 
land and 
accumula- 
tion of 
stock, 

rent being 
the first 
deduction, 


and profit 
the sec- 
ond, both 
in agricul- 
ture, 


and other 
arts and 
manufac- 
tures. 


The inde- 
pendent 
workman 
gets pro- 



fits as well 
as wages, 


but this 
case is in- 
frequent. 


Wages de- 
pend on 
contract 
between 
masters 
and work- 
men. 

The mas- 
ters have 
\he ad- 
vantage. 


though 
less is 
heard of 
masters’ 
combina- 
tions than 
of work- 
men’s. 


66 the wealth of NATIONS 

and workman, and enjoys the whole produce of his own labour, 
or the whole value which it adds to the materials upon which it is 
bestowed. It includes what are usually two distinct revenues, be- 
longing to two distinct persons, the profits of stock, and the wages 
of labour. 

Such cases, however, are not very frequent, and in every part of 
Europe, twenty workmen serve under a master for one that is in- 
dependent; and the wages of labour are every where understood to 
be, what they usually are, when the labourer is one person, and the 
owner of the stock which employs him another. 

What are the common wages of labour, depends every where up- 
on the contract usually made between those two parties, whose 
interests are by no means the same. The workmen desire to get as 
much, the masters to give as little as possible. The former are dis- 
posed to combine in order to raise, the latter in order to lower the 
wages of labour. 

It is not, however, difficult to foresee which of the two parties 
must, upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dis- 
pute, and force the other into a compliance with their terms. The 
masters, being fewer in number, can combine much more easily; 
and the law, besides, authorises, or at least does not prohibit their 
combinations,^® while it prohibits those of the workmen.^^ We have 
no acts of parliament agamst combining to lower the price of work; 
but many against combining to raise it. In all such disputes the 
masters can hold out much longer. A landlord, a farmer, a master 
manufacturer, or merchant, though they did not employ a single 
workman, could generally live a year or two upon the stocks which 
they have already acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a 
week, few could subsist a month, and scarce any a year without em- 
ployment. In the long-run the workman may be as necessary to his 
master as his master is to him, but the necessity is not so im- 
mediate. 

We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters, 
though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines, up- 
on this account, that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the 
world as of the subject. Masters are always and every where in a 
sort of tacit, but constant and uniform combination, not to raise 

Ed. I reads, “The masters being fewer in number can not only combine 
more easily, but the law authorises their combinations, or at least does not 
prohibit them.” 

7 Geo. I., stat. i, c. 13, as to London tailors; 12 Geo. I., c. 34, as to 
woolcombers and weavers; 12 Geo. L, c. 35, as to brick and tile makers with- 
in fifteen miles of London; 22 Geo. II., c. 27, § 12, as to persons employed in 
the woollen manufacture and many others. 



WAGES OF LABOUR 67 

the wages of labour above their actual rate. To violate this com- 
bination is every where a most unpopular action, and a sort -of re- 
proach to a master among his neighbours and equals. We seldom^ 
indeed, hear of this combination, because it is the usual, and one 
may say, the natural state of things which nobody ever hears of. 

Masters too sometimes enter into particular combinations to sink 
the wages of labour even below this rate. These are always con- 
ducted with the utmost silence and secrecy, till the moment of 
execution, and when the workmen yield, as they sometimes do, 
without resistance, though severely felt by them, they are never 
heard of by other people. Such combinations, however, are fre- 
quently resisted by a contrary defensive combination of the work- 
men; who sometimes too, without any provocation of this kind, 
combine of their own accord to raise the price of their labour. Their 
usual pretences are, sometimes the high price of provisions; 
sometimes the great profit which their masters make by their work. 

But whether their combinations be offensive or defensive, they are 
always abundantly heard of. In order to bring the point to a speedy 
decision, they have always recourse to the loudest clamour, and 
sometimes to the most shocking violence and outrage. They are 
desperate, and act with the folly and extravagance of desperate 
men, who must either starve, or frighten their masters into an 
immediate compliance with their demands. The masters upon these 
occasions are just as clamorous upon the other side, and never 
cease to call aloud for the assistance of the civil magistrate, and 
the rigorous execution of those laws which have been enacted with 
so much severity against the combinations of servants, labourers, 
and journeymen. The workmen, accordingly, very seldom derive 
any advantage from the violence of those tumultuous combina- 
tions, which, partly from the interposition of the civil magistrate, 
partly from the superior steadiness of the masters, partly from the 
necessity which the greater part of the workmen are under of sub- 
mitting for the sake of present subsistence, generally end in noth- 
ing, but the punishment or ruin of the ring-leaders. 

But though in disputes with their workmen, masters must gen- But mas- 
erally have the advantage, there is however a certain rate below 
which it seems impossible to reduce, for any considerable time, the duce 
ordinary wages even of the lowest species of labour. wages be- 

A man must always live by his work, and his wages must at least tain ra?e' 
be sufficient to maintain him. They must even upon most occasions 

“ The word is used as elsewhere in Adam Smith without the implication of 
falsity now attached to it: a pretence is simply something put forward. 

“Ed. I does not contain “either.” 



68 


namely, 
subsist- 
ence for a 
man and 
something 
over for a 
family. 


Wages 

maybe 

consider- 

ably 

above this 
rate, 

when 
there is an 
increasing 
demand 
for la- 
bourers, 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

be somewhat more; otherwise it would be impossible for him to 
bring up a family, and the race of such workmen could not last be- 
yond the first generation. Mr. Cantillon seems, upon this account, 
to suppose that the lowest species of common labourers must every 
where earn at least double their own maintenance, in order that 
one with another they may be enabled to bring up two children; 
the labour of the wife, on account of her necessary attendance on 
the children, being supposed no more than sufficient to provide for 
herself. But one-half the children born, it is computed, die before 
the age of manhood.^^ The poorest labourers, therefore, according 
to this account, must, one with another, attempt to rear at least 
four children, in order that two may have an equal chance of living 
to that age. But the necessary maintenance of four children, it is 
supposed, may be nearly equal to that of one man. The labour of 
an able-bodied slave, the same author adds, is computed to be 
worth double his maintenance; and that of the meanest labourer, 
he thinks, cannot be worth less than that of an able-bodied slave. 
Thus far at least seems certain, that, in order to bring up a family, 
the labour of the husband and wife together must, even in the low- 
est species of common labour, be able to earn something more than 
what is precisely necessary for their own maintenance; but in what 
proportion, whether in that above mentioned, or in any other, I 
shall not take upon me to determine.^® 

There are certain circumstances, however, which sometimes give 
the labourers an advantage, and enable them to raise their wages 
considerably above this rate; evidently the lowest which is consist- 
ent with common humanity. 

When in any country the demand for those who live by wages; 
labourers, journeymen, servants of every kind, is continually in- 
creasing; when every year furnishes employment for a greater 
number than had been employed the year before, the workmen 
have no occasion to combine in order to raise their wages. The 
scarcity of hands occasions a competition among masters, who bid 
against one another, in order to get workmen,^'^ and thus volun- 
tarily break through the natural combination of masters not to 
raise wages. 

Essai sur la nature du commerce en giniral, 1755, PP- 42-47. The “seems” 
is not meaningless, as Cantillon is unusually obscure in the passage referred to. 
It is not clear whether he intends to include the woman’s earnings or not. 

“ Le , before completing their seventeenth year, as stated by Dr. Halley, 
quoted by Cantillon, Essd, pp. 42, 43. 

Cantillon himself, p. 44, says: “C’est une matifere qui n’admet pas un cal- 
cul exact, et dans laquelle la prteion n’est pas m^me fort n^cessaire, il suf&t 
qu’on ne s’y eloigne pas beaucoup de la r6alit6.” 

” Ed. I reads “them.” 



WAGES OF LABOUR 69 

The demand for those who live by wages, it is evident, cannot 
increase but in proportion to the increase of the funds which are 
destined for the payment of wages. These funds are of two kinds; 
first, the revenue which is over and above what is necessary for the 
maintenance; and, secondly, the stock which is over and above 
what is necessary for the employment of their masters. 

When the landlord, annuitant, or monied man, has a greater rev- 
enue than what he judges sufficient to maintain his own family, he 
employs either the whole or a part of the surplus in maintaining 
one or more menial servants.^^ Increase this surplus, and he will 
naturally increase the number of those servants. 

When an independent workman, such as a weaver or shoe-maker, 
has got more stock than what is sufficient to purchase the materials 
of his own work, and to maintain himself till he can dispose of it, 
he naturally employs one or more journeymen with the surplus, in 
order to make a profit by their work. Increase this surplus, and he 
will naturally increase the number of his journeymen. 

The demand for those who live by wages, therefore, necessarily 
increases with the increase of the revenue and stock of every coun- 
try, and cannot possibly increase without it. The increase of rev- 
enue and stock is the increase of national wealth.^^ The demand 
for those who live by wages, therefore, naturally increases with the 
increase of national wealth, and cannot possibly increase without it. 

It is not the actual greatness of national wealth, but its con- 
tinual increase, which occasions a rise in the wages of labour. It 
is not, accordingly, in the richest countries, but in the most thriv- 
ing, or in those which are growing rich the fastest, that the wages of 
labour are highest. England is certainly, in the present times, a 
much richer country than any part of North America. The wages 
of labour, however, are much higher in North America than in any 
part of England. In the province of New York, common labourers 

There is no attempt to define “maintenance,” and consequently the di- 
vision of a man’s revenue into what is necessary for his maintenance and what 
is over and above is left perfectly vague. 

^ It seems to be implied here that keeping a menial servant, even to per- 
form the most necessary offices (e.g., to nurse the infant child of a widower), 
is not “maintaining” a family. 

Above, in the Introduction and Plan of the Work, the wealth of a nation 
was treated as synonymous with its annual produce, and there has been hith- 
erto no suggestion that its stock must be considered. 

“^Apparently this is a slip for “occasions high wages.” At any rate the next 
sentences require this assertion and not that actually made. 

““ The method of calculating wealth by the amount of annual produce per 
head adopted above, in the Introduction and Plan of the Work, is departed 
from here and below, p. 71, and frequently in later passages, in favour of the 
calculation by amount of capital wealth. 


which is 
caused by 
an in- 
crease of 
the funds 
destined 
for the 
payment 
of wages 
The funds 
consist of 

surplus 

revenue, 

and sur- 
plus stock 


The de- 
mand for 
labourers 
therefore 
increases 
with the 
increase 
of nation- 
al wealth. 

High 
wages are 
occa- 
sioned by 
the in- 
crease, 
not by the 
actual 
greatness 
of nation- 
al wealth. 



North 
America 
is more 
thiiving 
than Eng- 
land. 


70 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

earn three shillings and sixpence currency, equal to two shillings 
sterling, a day; ship carpenters, ten shillings and sixpence currency, 
with a pint of rum worth sixpence sterling, equal in all to six shil- 
lings and sixpence sterling; house carpenters and bricklayers, eight 
shillings currency, equal to four shillings and sixpence sterling; 
journeymen taylors, five shillings currency, equal to about two 
shillings and ten pence sterling. These prices are all above the Lon- 
don price; and wages are said to be as high in the other colonies as 
in New York. The price of provisions is every where in North Amer- 
ica much lower than in England. A dearth has never been known 
there. In the worst seasons, they have always had a sufficiency for 
themselves, though less for exportation. If the money price of la- 
bour, therefore, be higher than it is any where in the mother coun- 
try, its real price, the real command of the necessaries and con- 
veniences of life which it conveys to the labourer, must be higher 
in a still greater proportion. 

But though North America is not yet so rich as England, it is 
much more thriving, and advancing with much greater rapidity to 
the further acquisition of riches. The most decisive mark of the 
prosperity of any country is the increase of the number of its in- 
habitants. In Great Britain, and most other European countries, 
they are not supposed to double in less than five hundred years. In 
the British colonies in North America, it has been found, that they 
double in twenty or five-and-twenty years.^'^ Nor in the present 
times is this increase principally owing to the continual importation 
of new inhabitants, but to the great multiplication of the species. 
Those who live to old age, it is said, frequently see there from fifty 
to a hundred, and sometimes many more, descendants from their 
own body. Labour is there so well rewarded that a numerous family 
of children, instead of being a burthen is a source of opulence and 
prosperity to the parents. The labour of each child, before it can 

““This was written in 1773, before the commencement of the late dis- 
turbances. Ed. I does not contain this note ; eds. 2 and 3 read “present dis- 
turbances.” 

Petty, Political Arithmetic, 1699, P- 18, made the period for England 360 
years. Gregory King, quoted by Davenant, Works, ed. Whitworth, 1771, voL 
ii., p. 176, m^es it 43$ years in the past and probably 600 in the future. In 
1703 the population of Virginia was 60,000, in 1755 it was 300,000, and in 
1763 it was $00,000, “by which they appear to have doubled their numbers 
every twenty years as nigh as may be.”— Present State of Great Britain 
and North America with regard to Agriculture, Population, Trade and Manu- 
factures, 1767, p. 22, note. “The original number of persons who in 1643 had 
settled in New England was 21,200. Ever since, it is reckoned that more have 
left them than have gone to them. In the year 1760 they were increased to 
half a million They have therefore all along doubled their own number in 
twenty-five years ” — Richard Price, Observations on Reversionary PaymentSf 
etc., 1771, pp. 204, 205. The statement as to America is repeated below, p. 392. 



71 


WAGES OF LABOUR 

leave their housej is computed to be worth a hundred pounds clear 
gain to them. A young widow with four or five young children, who, 
among the middling or inferior ranks of people in Europe, would 
have so little chance for a second husband, is there frequently 
courted as a sort of fortune. The value of children is the greatest 
of all encouragements to marriage. We cannot, therefore, wonder 
that the people in North America should generally marry very 
young. Notwithstanding the great increase occasioned by such 
early marriages, there is a continual complaint of the scarcity of 
hands in North America. The demand for labourers, the funds 
destined for maintaining them, increase, it seems, still faster than 
they can find labourers to employ. 

Though the wealth of a country should be very great, yet if it Wages are 
has been long stationary, we must not expect to find the wages of sta- 
labour very high in it. The funds destined for the payment of wages, tionary 

the revenue and stock of its inhabitants, may be of the greatest ex- 
tent; but if they have continued for several centuries of the same, 
or very nearly of the same extent, the number of labourers em- 
ployed every year could easily supply, and even more than supply, 
the number wanted the following year. There could seldom be any 
scarcity of hands, nor could the masters be obliged to bid against 
one another in order to get them. The hands, on the contrary, 
would, in this case, naturally multiply beyond their employment. 

There would be a constant scarcity of employment, and the labour- 
ers would be obliged to bid against one another in order to get it. If 
in such a country the wages of labour had ever been more than suf- 
ficient to maintain the labourer, and to enable him to bring up a 
family, the competition of the labourers and the interest of the 
masters would soon reduce them to this lowest rate which is con- 
sistent with common humanity. China has been long one of the 
richest, that is, one of the most fertile, best cultivated, most in- 
dustrious, and most populous countries in the world.^^ It seems, 
however, to have been long stationary. Marco Polo, who visited it 
more than five hundred years ago,^® describes its cultivation, in- 
dustry, and populousness, almost in the same terms in which they 
are described by travellers in the present times. It had perhaps, 
even long before his time, acquired that full complement of riches 
which the nature of its laws and institutions permits it to acquire. 

The accounts of all travellers, inconsistent in many other respects, 

""’Here we have a third method of calculating the riches or wealth of a 
country, namely by the amount of produce per acre. For other references to 
this “wealth” of China see the index, s.v., China. 

-‘’The date of his arrival was 1275. 



72 the wealth of nations 

agree in the low wages of labour, and in the difficulty which a 
labourer finds in bringing up a family in China. If by digging the 
ground a whole day he can get what will purchase a small quantity 
of rice in the evening, he is contented. The condition of artificers is, 
if possible, still worse. Instead of waiting indolently in their work- 
houses, for the calls of their customers, as in Europe, they are con- 
tinually running about the streets with the tools of their respective 
trades, offering their service, and as it were begging employment.^'^ 
The poverty of the lower ranks of people in China far surpasses 
that of the most beggarly nations in Europe. In the neighbourhood 
of Canton many hundred, it is commonly said, many thousand 
families have no habitation on the land, but live constantly in little 
fishing boats upon the rivers and canals. The subsistence which 
they find there is so scanty that they are eager to fish up the nastiest 
garbage thrown overboard from any European ship. Any carrion, 
the carcase of a dead dog or cat, for example, though half putrid 
and stinking, is as welcome to them as the most wholesome food 
to the people of other countries. Marriage is encouraged in China, 
not by the profitableness of children, but by the liberty of destroy- 
ing them. In all great towns several are every night exposed in the 
street, or drowned like puppies in the water. The performance of 
this horrid office is even said to be the avowed business by which 
some people earn their subsistence.^® 

^ “Les artisans courent les villes du matin au soir pour chercher pratique,” 
Quesnay, Ephimindes du citoyen, Mars, 1767; (Euvres, ed. Oncken, 188S, 
p. S8i. 

^ “Cependant quelque sobre et quelque industrieux que soit le peuple de la 
Chine, le grand nombre de ses habitants y cause beaucoup de mis^re. On en 
voit de si pauvres, que ne pouvant fournir a leurs enfants les aliments n^ces- 
saires, ils les exposent dans les rues, surtout lorsque les m6res tombent mal- 
ades, ou qu’elles manquent de lait pour les nourrir. Ces pctits innocents sont 
condamnes en quelque mani^re a la mort presque au meme instant quails ont 
commence de vivre: cela frappe dans les grandes villes, comme Peking, Can- 
ton; car dans les autres villes h peine s^en apergoit-on. 

‘‘C’est ce qui a porte les missionnaires a entretenir dans ces endroits tr^s 
peuples, un nombre de cat6chistes, qui en partagent entre eux tous les quar- 
ters, et les parcourent tous les matins, pour procurer la grice du baptSme 
k une multitude d’enfants moribonds. 

“Dans la meme vue on a quelquefois gagne des sages-femmes infid^les afin 
qu^elles permissent k des filles chretiennes de ses suivre dans les diff^rentes 
maisons oh elles sont appelees: car il arrive quelquefois que les Chinois se 
trouvant hors d’etat de nourrir une nombreuse famille, engagent ces sages- 
femmes k etouffer dans un bassin plein d’eau les petits filles aussitdt qu’elles 
sont nees ; ces chretiennes ont soin de les baptiser, et par ce moyen ces tristes 
victimes de I’indigence de leurs parents trouvent la vie eternelle dans ces 
mSmes eaux, qui leur ravissent une vie courte et perissable.” — ^Du Halde, De- 
scription giographique, historique, chronologiqtie, politique et physique de 
Vempire de la Chine et de la Tartarie chinoise, 173$, tom. ii., pp. 73, 74. The 
statement in the text above that drowning babies is a special business is pos- 
sibly founded on a mistranslation of “sages-femmes.” 



WAGES OF LABOUR 73 

China, however, though it may perhaps stand still, does not seem 
to go backwards. Its towns are no-where deserted by their inhabit- 
ants. The lands which had once been cultivated are no-where 
neglected. The same or very nearly the same annual labour must 
therefore continue to be performed, and the funds destined for 
maintaining it must not, consequently, be sensibly diminished. The 
lowest class of labourers, therefore, notwithstanding their scanty 
subsistence, must some way or another make shift to continue their 
race so far as to keep up their usual numbers. 

But it would be otherwise in a country where the funds destined 
for the maintenance of labour were sensibly decaying. Every year 
the demand for servants and labourers would, in all the different 
classes of employments, be less than it had been the year before. 
Many who had been bred in the superior classes, not being able to 
find emplo3mient in their own business, would be glad to seek it in 
the lowest. The lowest class being not only overstocked with its own 
workmen, but with the overflowings of all the other classes, the 
competition for emplo3mient would be so great in it, as to reduce 
the wages of labour to the most miserable and scanty subsistence of 
the labourer. Many would not be able to find employment even up- 
on these hard terms, but would either starve, or be driven to seek a 
subsistence either by begging, or by the perpetration perhaps of the 
greatest enormities. Want, famine, and mortality would immedi- 
ately prevail in that class, and from thence extend themselves to 
all the superior classes, till the number of inhabitants in the coun- 
try was reduced to what could easily be maintained by the revenue 
and stock which remained in it, and which had escaped either the 
tyranny or calamity which had destroyed the rest. This perhaps is 
nearly the present state of Bengal, and of some other of the Eng- 
lish settlements in the East Indies. In a fertile country which had 
before been much depopulated, where subsistence, consequently, 
should not be very difficult, and where, notwithstanding, three or 
four hundred thousand people die of hunger in one year, we may be 
assured that the funds destined for the maintenance of the labour- 
ing poor are fast decaying. The difference between the genius of 
the British constitution which protects and governs North America, 
and that of the mercantile company which oppresses and domineers 
in the East Indies, cannot perhaps be better illustrated than by the 
different state of those countries. 

The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the necessary ef- 
fect, so it is the natural symptom of increasing national wealth. 
The scanty maintenance of the labouring poor, on the other hand. 


China is 
not going 
back- 
wards 
and la- 
bourers 
there keep 
up their 
numbers. 


In a de- 
clining 
country 
this would 
not be the 
case. 



In Great 
Britain 
wages are 
above the 
lowest 
rate, 


since (i) 
there is a 
difference 
between 
winter 
and sum- 
mer 
wages, 


( 2 ) wages 
do not 
fluctuate 
with the 
price of 
provi- 
sions, 


( 3 ) wages 
vary more 
from 
place to 
place than 
the price 
of provi- 
sions, 


74 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

is the natural symptom that things are at a stand, and their starving 
condition that they are going fast backwards. 

In Great Britain the wages of labour seem, in the present times, 
to be evidently more than what is precisely necessary to enable the 
labourer to bring up a family. In order to satisfy ourselves upon 
this point it will not be necessary to enter into any tedious or 
doubtful calculation of what may be the lowest sum upon which it 
is possible to do this. There are many plain symptoms that the 
wages of labour are no-where in this country regulated by this low- 
est rate which is consistent with common humanity. 

First, in almost every part of Great Britain there is a distinction, 
even in the lowest species of labour, between summer and winter 
wages. Summer wages are always highest. But on account of the 
extraordinary expence of fewel, the maintenance of a family is most 
expensive in winter. Wages, therefore, being highest when this ex- 
pence is lowest, it seems evident that they are not regulated by 
what is necessary for this expence; but by the quantity and sup- 
posed value of the work. A labourer, it may be said indeed, ought to 
save part of his summer wages in order to defray his winter ex- 
pence; and that through the whole year they do not exceed what is 
necessary to maintain his family through the whole year. A slave, 
however, or one absolutely dependent on us for immediate subsist- 
ence, would not be treated in this manner. His daily subsistence 
would be proportioned to his daily necessities. 

Secondly, the wages of labour do not in Great Britain fluctuate 
with the price of provisions. These vary every-where from year to 
year, frequently from month to month. But in many places the 
money price of labour remains uniformly the same sometimes for 
half a century together. If in these places, therefore, the labouring 
poor can maintain their families in dear years, they must be at their 
ease in times of moderate plenty, and in affluence in those of extra- 
ordinary cheapness. The high price of provisions during these ten 
years past has not in many parts of the kingdom been accompanied 
with any sensible rise in the money price of labour. It has, indeed, 
in some; owing probably more to the increase of the demand for 
labour than to that of the price of provisions. 

Thirdly, as the price of provisions varies more from year to year 
than the wages of labour, so, on the other hand, the wages of la- 
bour vary more from place to place than the price of provisions. 
The prices of bread and butcher’s meat are generally the same or 
very nearly the same through the greater part of the united king- 
dom. These and most other things which are sold by retail, the way 
in which the labouring poor buy all things, are generally fully as 



WAGES OF LABOUR 75 

cheap or cheaper in great towns than in the remoter parts of the 
country, for reasons which I shall have occasion to explain here- 
after.^^ But the wages of labour in a great town and its neighbour- 
hood are frequently a fourth or a fifth part, twenty or five-and- 
twenty per cent, higher than at a few miles distance. Eighteen 
pence a day may be reckoned the common price of labour in Lon- 
don and its neighbourhood. At a few miles distance it falls to four- 
teen and fifteen pence. Ten pence may be reckoned its price in 
Edinburgh and its neighbourhood. At a few miles distance it falls 
to eight pence, the usual price of common labour through the 
greater part of the low country of Scotland, where it varies a good 
deal less than in England.^^ Such a difference of prices, which it 
seems is not always sufficient to transport a man from one parish to 
another, would necessarily occasion so great a transportation of the 
most bulky commodities, not only from one parish to another, but 
from one end of the kingdom, almost from one end of the world to 
the other, as would soon reduce them more nearly to a level. After 
all that has been said of the levity and inconstancy of human na- 
ture, it appears evidently from experience that a man is of all sorts 
of luggage the most difficult to be transported. If the labouring 
poor, therefore, can maintain their families in those parts of the 
kingdom where the price of labour is lowest, they must be in afflu- 
ence where it is highest. 

Fourthly, the variations in the price of labour not only do not 
correspond either in place or time with those in the price of pro- 
visions, but they are frequently quite opposite. 

Grain, the food of the common people, is dearer in Scotland than 
in England, whence Scotland receives almost every year very large 
supplies. But English corn must be sold dearer in Scotland, the 
country to which it is brought, than in England, the country from 
which it comes; and in proportion to its quality it cannot be sold 
dearer in Scotland than the Scotch com that comes to the same 
market in competition with it. The quality of grain depends chiefly 
upon the quantity of flour or meal which it 3delds at the mill, and in 
this respect English grain is so much superior to the Scotch, that, 
though often dearer in appearance, or in proportion to the measure 
of its bulk, it is generally cheaper in reality, or in proportion to its 
quality, or even to the measure of its weight. The price of labour, 
on the contrary, is dearer in England than in Scotland. If the la- 
bouring poor, therefore, can maintain their families in the one part 

Below, p. 1 13. 

^ The difference between England and Scotland in this respect is attributed 
to the English law of settlement below, p, 140. 


and (4) 
frequently 
wages and 
the price 
of provi- 
sions vary 
in oppo- 
site direc- 
tions, as 
grain is 
cheaper 
and wages 
are higher 
in Eng- 
land than 
in Scot- 
land; 



and in last 
century 
grain was 
dearer 
and wages 
were low- 
er than in 
this; 


76 the wealth op nations 

of the united kingdom, they must be in affluence in the other. Oat- 
meal indeed supplies the common people in Scotland with the 
greatest and the best part of their food, which is in general much 
inferior to that of their neighbours of the same rank in England.®^ 
This difference, however, in the mode of their subsistence is not the 
cause, but the effect, of the difference in their wages; though, by a 
strange misapprehension, I have frequently heard it represented as 
the cause. It is not because one man keeps a coach while his neigh- 
bour walks a-foot, that the one is rich and the other poor; but be- 
cause the one is rich he keeps a coach, and because the other is 
poor he walks a-foot. 

During the course of the last century, taking one year with an- 
other, grain was dearer in both parts of the united kingdom than 
during that of the present. This is a matter of fact which cannot 
now admit of any reasonable doubt; and the proof of it is, if pos- 
sible, still more decisive with regard to Scotland than with regard 
to England. It is in Scotland supported by the evidence of the pub- 
lic fiars, annual valuations made upon oath, according to the actual 
state of the markets, of all the different sorts of grain in every dif- 
ferent county of Scotland. If such direct proof could require any 
collateral evidence to confirm it, I would observe that this has like- 
wise been the case in France, and probably in most other parts of 
Europe. With regard to France there is the clearest proof.®^ But 
though it is certain that in both parts of the united kingdom grain 
was somewhat dearer in the last century than in the present, it is 
equally certain that labour was much cheaper. If the labouring 
poor, therefore, could bring up their families then, they must be 
much more at their ease now. In the last century, the most usual 
day-wages of common labour through the greater part of Scotland 
were sixpence in summer and five-pence in winter. Three shillings a 
week, the same price very nearly, still continues to be paid in some 
parts of the Highlands and Western Islands. Through the greater 
part of the low country the most usual wages of common labour are 
now eight-pence a day; ten-pence, sometimes a shilling about Edin- 
burgh, in the counties which border upon England, probably on 
account of that neighbourhood, and in a few other places where 
there has lately been a considerable rise in the demand for labour, 
about Glasgow, Carron, Ayr-shire, &c. In England the improve- 
ments of agriculture, manufactures and commerce began much 
earlier than in Scotland. The demand for labour, and consequently 
its price, must necessarily have increased with those improvements. 


The inferiority of oatmeal is again insisted on below, p 160. 
Authorities are quoted below, pp. 240. 



WAGES OF LABOUR 77 

In the last century, accordingly, as well as in the present, the wages 
of labour were higher in England than in Scotland. They have risen 
too considerably since that time, though, on account of the greater 
variety of wages paid there in different places, it is more difficult to 
ascertain how much. In 1 614, the pay of a foot soldier was the same 
as in the present times, eight pence a dsyp When it was first 
established it would naturally be regulated by the usual wages of 
common labourers, the rank of people from which foot soldiers are 
commonly drawn. Lord Chief Justice Hales, who wrote in the 
time of Charles II. computes the necessary expence of a labourer’s 
family, consisting of six persons, the father and mother, two chil- 
dren able to do something, and two not able, at ten shillings a week, 
or twenty-six pounds a year. If they cannot earn this by their 
labour, they must make it up, he supposes, either by begging or 
stealing. He appears to have enquired very carefully into this sub- 
ject.®^ In 1688, Mr. Gregory King, whose skill in political arith- 
metic is so much extolled by Doctor Davenant,^® computed the 
ordinary income of labourers and out-servants to be fifteen pounds 
a year to a family, which he supposed to consist, one with another, 
of three and a half persons His calculation, therefore, though 
different in appearance, corresponds very nearly at bottom with 
that of judge Hales. Both suppose the weekly expence of such fam- 
ilies to be about twenty pence a head. Both the pecuniary income 
and expence of such families have increased considerably since that 
time through the greater part of the kingdom; in some places more, 
and in some less; though perhaps scarce any where so much as 
some exaggerated accounts of the present wages of labour have 
lately represented them to the public. The price of labour, it must 
be observed, cannot be ascertained very accurately any where, 
different prices being often paid at the same place and for the same 
sort of labour, not only according to the different abilities of the 
workmen, but according to the easiness or hardness of the masters. 
Where wages are not regulated by law, all that we can pretend to 
determine is what are the most usual; and experience seems to 

®®Huine, History, ed. of 1773, vol. vi., p. 178, quoting R3aner’s Foedera, 
tom. xvi., p. 717. This was for service in Germany. 

Sir Matthew Hale. 

^ See his scheme for the maintenance of the Poor, in Burn’s History of the 
Poor-laws. This note appears first in ed. 2. Hale’s Discourse Touching Pro- 
vision for the Poor was printed in 1683. It contains no internal evidence of the 
careful inquiry attributed to it above. 

Davenant, Essay upon the probable Methods of Making a People Gainers 
in the Balance of Trade, 1699, pp, 15, 16; in Works, ed. ’^^itworth, vol. ii., 
p. 175* 

Scheme D in Davenant, Balance of Trade, in Works Scheme B, vol. ii , p 
184. See below, p. 196, note. 



while 
other ne- 
cessaries 
and con- 
veniencies 
have also 
become 
cheaper. 


ffigh 
earnings 
of labour 
are an ad- 
vantage 
to the so- 
ciety. 


78 the wealth of nations 

show that law can never regulate them properly, though it has 
often pretended to do so. 

The real recompence of labour, the real quantity of the neces- 
saries and conveniencies of life which it can procure to the labourer, 
has, during the course of the present century, increased perhaps in 
a still greater proportion than its money price. Not only grain has 
become somewhat cheaper, but many other things, from which the 
industrious poor derive an agreeable and wholesome variety of 
food, have become a great deal cheaper. Potatoes, for example, do 
not at present, through the greater part of the kingdom, cost half 
the price which they used to do thirty or forty years ago. The same 
thing may be said of turnips, carrots, cabbages; things which were 
formerly never raised but by the spade, but which are now com- 
monly raised by the plough. All sort of garden stuff too has become 
cheaper. The greater part of the apples and even of the onions 
consumed in Great Britain were in the last century imported from 
Flanders. The great improvements in the coarser manufactures of 
both linen and woollen cloth furnish the labourers with cheaper 
and better cloathing; and those in the manufactures of the coarser 
metals, with cheaper and better instruments of trade, as well as 
with many agreeable and convenient pieces of household furniture. 
Soap, salt, candles, leather, and fermented liquors, have, indeed, 
become a good deal dearer; chiefly from the taxes which have been 
laid upon them. The quantity of these, however, which the labour- 
ing poor are under any necessity of consuming, is so very small, 
that the increase in their price does not compensate the diminution 
in that of so many other things. The common complaint that lux- 
ury extends itself even to the lowest ranks of the people, and that 
the labouring poor will not now be contented with the same food, 
cloathing and lodging which satisfied them in former limes, may 
convince us that it is not the money price of labour only, but its 
real recompence, which has augmented. 

Is this improvement in the circumstances of the lower ranks of 
the people to be regarded as an advantage or as an inconveniency to 
the society? The answer seems at first sight abundantly plain. 
Servants, labourers and workmen of different kinds, make up the 
far greater part of every great political society. But what improves 
the circumstances of the greater part can never be regarded as an 

Berkeley, Querist, 5th ed., 1752, qu. 2, asks “whether a people can be 
called poor where the common sort are well fed, clothed and lodged.” Hume, 
“On Commerce,” says: “The greatness of a state and the happiness of its 
subjects, however independent they may be supposed in some respects, are 
commonly allowed to be inseparable with regard to commerce. ’^—Political 
Discourses, 1752, p. 4. 



WAGES OF LABOUR 79 

inconveniency to the whole. No society can surely be flourishing 
and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are poor 
and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, cloath 
and lodge the whole body of the people, should have such a share 
of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably 
well fed, cloathed and lodged. 

Poverty, though it no doubt discourages, does not always prevent 
marriage. It seems even to be favourable to generation. A half- 
starved Highland woman frequently bears more than twenty chil- 
dren, while a pampered fine lady is often incapable of bearing any, 
and is generally exhausted by two or three. Barrenness, so frequent 
among women of fashion, is very rare among those of inferior sta- 
tion. Luxury in the fair sex, while it inflames perhaps the passion 
for enjoyment, seems always to weaken, and frequently to destroy 
altogether, the powers of generation. 

But poverty, though it does not prevent the generation, is ex- 
tremely unfavourable to the rearing of children. The tender plant 
is produced, but in so cold a soil, and so severe a climate, soon 
withers and dies. It is not uncommon, I have been frequently told, 
in the Highlands of Scotland for a mother who has borne twenty 
children not to have two alive. Several officers of great experience 
have assured me, that so far from recruiting their regiment, they 
have never been able to supply it with drums and fifes from all the 
soldiers’ children that were born in it. A greater number of fine chil- 
dren, however, is seldom seen any where than about a barrack of 
soldiers. Very few of them, it seems, arrive at the age of thirteen or 
fourteen. In some places one half the children born die before they 
are four years of age; in many places before they are seven; and in 
almost all places before they are nine or ten. This great mortality, 
however, will every where be found chiefly among the children of 
the common people, who cannot afford to tend them with the same 
care as those of better station. Though their marriages are generally 
more fruitful than those of people of fashion, a smaller proportion 
of their children arrive at maturity. In foundling hospitals, and 
among the children brought up by parish charities, the mortality 
is still greater than among those of the common people. 

Every species of animals naturally multiplies in proportion to 
the means of their subsistence, and no species can ever multiply 
beyond it. But in civilized society it is only among the inferior 
ranks of people that the scantiness of subsistence can set limits 
to the further multiplication of the human species; and it can do 
so in no other way than by destroying a great part of the children 
which their fruitful marriages produce. 


Poverty 
does not 
prevent 
births, 


but is un- 
favour- 
able to 
the rear- 
ing of 
children, 


andso re- 
strains 
multipli- 
cation, 



while the 
liberal re- 
ward of 
labour en- 
courages 
it, 


as the 
wear and 
tear of the 
free man 
must be 
paid for 
just like 
that of 
the slave, 
though 
not so ex- 
trava- 
gantly. 


the wealth of nations 

The liberal rewatd of labour, by enabling them to provide bet- 
ter for their children, and consequently to bring up a greater num- 
ber, naturally tends to widen and extend those limits. It deserves 
to be remarked too, that it necessarily does this as nearly as pos- 
sible in the proportion which the demand for labour requires.^^ If 
this demand is continually increasing, the reward of labour must 
necessarily encourage in such a manner the marriage and multi- 
plication of labourers, as may enable them to supply that continu- 
ally increasing demand by a continually increasing population. If 
the reward should at any time be less than what was requisite for 
this purpose, the deficiency of hands would soon raise it; and if it 
should at any time be more, their excessive multiplication would 
soon lower it to this necessary rate. The market would be so much 
under-stocked with labour in the one case, and so much over- 
stocked in the other, as would soon force back its price to that 
proper rate which the circunastances of the society required. It is 
in this manner that the demand for men, like that for any other 
commodity, necessarily regulates the production of men; quickens 
it when it goes on too slowly, and stops it when it advances too 
fast. It is this demand which regulates and determines the state of 
propagation in all the different countries of the world, in North 
America, in Europe, and in China; which renders it rapidly pro- 
gressive in the first, slow and gradual in the second, and altogether 
stationary in the last.^^ 

The wear and tear of a slave, it has been said, is at the expence 
of his master; but that of a free servant is at his own expence. The 
wear and tear of the latter, however, is, in reality, as much at the 
expence of his master as that of the former. The wages paid to 
journeymen and Servants of every kind must be such as may enable 
them, one with another, to continue the race of journeymen and 
servants, according as the increasing, diminishing, or stationary de- 
mand of the society may happen to require. But though the wear 
and tear of a free servant be equally at the expence of his master, 
it generally costs him much less than that of a slave. The fund 
destined for replacing or repairing, if I may say so, the wear and 

Cantillon, Essai, pt. i., ch. ix., title, “Le nombre de laboureurs, artisans et 
autres qui travaillent dans un etat se proportionne naturellement au besoin 
qu’on en a.” 

'®Ed. ireads “If it.” 

Berkeley, Querist, qu. 62, asks “whether a country inhabited by people 
well fed, clothed and lodged would not become every day more populous? 
And whether a numerous stock of people in such circumstances would not 
constitute a flourishing nation?” 

^ Ed, I reads “tear and wear” here and in the three other cases where the 
phrase is used in this paragraph. 



WAGES OF LABOUR Si 

tear of the slave, is commonly managed by a negligent master or 
careless overseer. That destined for performing the same office with 
regard to the free man, is managed by the free man himself. The 
disorders which generally prevail in the oeconomy of the rich, 
naturally introduce themselves into the management of the former: 
The strict frugality and parsimonious attention of the poor as 
naturally establish themselves in that of the latter. Under such dif- 
ferent management, the same purpose must require very different 
degrees of expence to execute it. It appears, accordingly, from the 
experience of all ages and nations, I believe, that the work done by 
freemen comes cheaper in the end than that performed by slaves. 
It is found to do so even at Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, 
where the wages of common labour are so very high. 

The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the effect of in- 
creasing wealth, so it is the cause of increasing population. To 
complain of it, is to lament over the necessary effect and cause of 
the greatest public prosperity. 

It deserves to be remarked, perhaps, that it is in the progressive 
state, while the society is advancing to the further acqyisition, 
rather than when it has acquired its full complement of riches, th^t 
the condition of the labouring poor, of the great body of the people, 
seems to be the happiest and the most comfortable. It is hard in 
the stationary, and miserable in the declining state. The progres- 
sive state is in reality the cheerful and the hearty state to all the 
different orders of the society. The stationary is dull; the declining 
melancholy. 

The liberal reward of labour, as it encourages the propagation, 
so it increases the industry of the common people. The wages of 
labour are the encouragement of industry, which, like every other 
human quality, improves in proportion to the encouragement it 
receives. A plentiful subsistence increases the bodily strength of the 
labourer, and the comfortable hope of bettering his condition, and 
of ending his days perhaps in ease and plenty, animates him to 
exert that strength to the utmost. Where wages are high, accord- 
ingly, we shall always find the workmen more active, diligent, and 
expeditious, than where they are low; in England, for example, 
than in Scotland; in the neighbourhood of great towns, than in re- 
mote country places. Some workmen, indeed, when they can earn 
in four days what will maintain them through the week, will be idle 
the other three. This, however, is by no means the case with the 
greater part.'^^ Workmen, on the contrary, when they are liberally 
paid by the piece, are very apt to over-work themselves, and to ruin 

"This is a more favourable view than that taken in Lectures, p. 257. 


High 
wages in- 
crease 
popula- 
tion. 

The pro- 
gressive 
state is 
the best 
for the la- 
bouring 
poor. 


High 
wages en- 
courage 
industry. 



The opin- 
ion that 
cheap 
years en- 
courage 
idleness is 
erroneous. 


S2 the wealth of nations 

their health and constitution in a few years. A carpenter in London, 
and in some other places, is not supposed to last in his utmost 
vigour above eight years. Something of the same kind happens in 
many other trades, in which the workmen are paid by the piece; 
as they generally are in manufactures, and even in country labour, 
wherever wages are higher than ordinary. Almost every class of 
artificers is subject to some peculiar infirmity occasioned by ex- 
cessive application to their peculiar species of work. Ramiizzini, an 
eminent Italian physician, has written a particular book concern- 
ing such diseases.^'^ We do not reckon our soldiers the most indus- 
trious set of people among us. Yet when soldiers have been em- 
ployed in some particular sorts of work, and liberally paid by the 
piece, their officers have frequently been obliged to stipulate with 
the undertaker, that they should not be allowed to earn above a 
certain sum every day, according to the rate at which they were 
paid. Till this stipulation was made, mutual emulation and the de- 
sire of greater gain, frequently prompted them to over-work them- 
selves, and to hurt their health by excessive labour. Excessive 
application during four days of the week, is frequently the real 
cause of the idleness of the other three, so much and so loudly com- 
plained of. Great labour, either of mind or body, continued for 
several days together, is in most men naturally followed by a great 
desire of relaxation, which, if not restrained by force or by some 
strong necessity, is almost irresistible. It is the call of nature, which 
requires to be relieved by some indulgence, sometimes of ease only, 
but sometimes too of dissipation and diversion. If it is not complied 
with, the consequences are often dangerous, and sometimes fatal, 
and such as almost always, sooner or later, bring on the peculiar 
infirmity of the trade. If masters would always listen to the dictates 
of reason and humanity, they have frequently occasion rather to 
moderate, than to animate the application of many of their work- 
men. It will be found, I believe, in every sort of trade, that the man 
who works so moderately, as to be able to work constantly, not only 
preserves his health the longest, but, in the course of the year, exe- 
cutes the greatest quantity of work. 

In cheap years, it is pretended, workmen are generally more idle, 
and in dear ones more industrious than ordinary. A plentiful sub- 
sistence therefore, it has been concluded, relaxes, and a scanty one 
quickens their industry. That a little more plenty than ordinary 
may render some workmen idle, cannot well be doubted; but that 
it should have this effect upon the greater part, or that men in 

morbis artificum diatriba, 1700, translated into English (A Treatise 
on the Diseases of Tradesmen) by R. James, 1746. 



WAGES OF LABOUR ^3 

general should work better when they are ill fed than when they 
are well fed, when they are disheartened than when they are in 
good spirits, when they are frequently sick than when they are 
generally in good health, seems not very probable. Years of dearth, 
it is to be observed, are generally among the common people years 
of sickness and mortality, which cannot fail to diminish the pro- 
^ duce of their industry. 

In years of plenty, servants frequently leave their masters, and 
trust their subsistence to what they can make by their own in- 
dustry. But the same cheapness of provisions, by increasing the 
fund which is destined for the maintenance of servants, encourages 
masters, farmers especially, to employ a greater number. Farmers 
upon such occasions expect more profit from their corn by main- 
taining a few more labouring servants, than by selling it at a low 
price in the market. The demand for servants increases, while the 
number of those who offer to supply that demand diminishes. The 
price of labour, therefore, frequently rises in cheap years. 

In years of scarcity, the difficulty and uncertainity of subsist- 
ence make all such people eager to return to service. But the high 
price of provisions, by diminishing the funds destined for the main- 
tenance of servants, disposes masters rather to diminish than to 
increase the number of those they have. In dear years too, poor in- 
dependent workmen frequently consume the little stocks with 
which they had used to supply themselves with the materials of 
their work, and are obliged to become journeymen for subsistence. 
More people want employment than can easily get it; many are 
willing to take it upon lower terms than ordinary, and the wages 
of both servants and journeymen frequently sink in dear years. 

Masters of all sorts, therefore, frequently make better bargains 
with their servants in dear than in cheap years, and find them more 
humble and dependent in the former than in the latter. They 
naturally, therefore, commend the former as more favourable to 
industry. Landlords and farmers, besides, two of the largest classes 
of masters, have another reason for being pleased with dear years. 
The rents of the one and the profits of the other depend very much 
upon the price of provisions. Nothing can be more absurd, how- 
ever, than to imagine that men in general should work less when 
they work for themselves, than when they work for other people. A 
poor independent workman will generally be more industrious than 
even a journeyman who works by the piece. The one enjoys the 
whole produce of his own industry; the other shares it with his 
master. The one, in his separate independent state, is less liable 
to the temptations of bad company, which in large manufactories 


Wag^are 
high in 
cheap 
years, 


and low 
in dear 
years, 


so that 

masters 

commend 

dear 

years. 



Messance 
shows 
that in 
some 
French 
manufac- 
tures 
more is 
produced 
in cheap 
years. 


No con- 
nexion is 
visible be- 
tween 
dearness 
or cheap- 
ness of 
the years 
and the 
variations 
in Scotch 
linen and 
Yorkshire 
woollen 
manufac- 
tures. 


84 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

SO frequently ruin the morals of the other. The superiority of the 
independent workman over those servants who are hired by the 
month or by the year, and whose wages and maintenance are the 
same whether they do much or do little, is likely to be still greater. 
Cheap years tend to increase the proportion of independent work- 
men to journeymen and servants of all kinds, and dear years to 
diminish it. 

A French author of great knowledge and ingenuity, Mr. Mes- 
sance, receiver of the tailles in the election of St. Etienne, en- 
deavours to show that the poor do more work in cheap than in 
dear years, by comparing the quantity and value of the goods made 
upon those different occasions in three different manufactures; one 
of coarse woollens carried on at Elbeuf; one of linen, and another 
of silk, both which extend through the whole generality of Rou- 
en.^® It appears from his account, which is copied from the registers 
of the public offices, that the quantity and value of the goods made 
in all those three manufactures has generally been greater in cheap 
than in dear years; and that it has always been greatest in the 
cheapest, and least in the dearest years. All the three seem to be 
stationary manufactures, or which, though their produce may vary 
somewhat from year to year, are upon the whole neither going back- 
wards nor forwards. 

The manufacture of linen in Scotland, and that of coarse wool- 
lens in the west riding of Yorkshire, are growing manufactures, of 
which the produce is generally, though with some variations, in- 
creasing both in quantity and value. Upon examining, however, the 
accounts which have been published of their annual produce, I 
have not been able to observe that its variations have had any 
sensible connection with the dearness or cheapness of the seasons. 
In 1740, a year of great scarcity, both manufactures, indeed, ap- 
pear to have declined very considerably. But in 1756, another year 
of great scarcity, the Scotch manufacture made more than ordi- 
nary advances. The Yorkshire manufacture, indeed, declined, and 
its produce did not rise to what it had been in 1755 till 1766, after 
the repeal of the American stamp act. In that and the following 
year it greatly exceeded what it had ever been before, and it has 
continued to advance ever since. 

The produce of all great manufactures for distant sale must 
Misprinted “taillies” in eds. 3-5. 

^Recherches sur la population des giniralitis d' Auvergne, de Lyon, de 
Rouen, et de quelques provinces et villes du royaume, avec des rS flexions sur 
la valeur du bled tant en France giden Angleterre, depuis 1674 jusqu^en 1764, 
par M. Messance, receveur des taOles de l’ 61 ection de Saint-Etienne, 1766, pp. 
287-292, 3o5-'?o8 

*^Ed. I reads “continued to do so.” 



WAGES OF LABOUR S5 

necessarily depend, not so much upon the dearness or cheapness of 
the seasons in the countries where they are carried on, as upon the 
circumstances which affect the demand in the countries where they 
are consumed; upon peace or war, upon the prosperity or declen- 
sion of other rival manufactures, and upon the good or bad humour 
of their principal customers. A great part of the extraordinary 
work, besides, which is probably done in cheap years, never enters 
the public registers of manufactures. The men servants who leave 
their masters become independent labourers. The women return to 
their parents, and commonly spin in order to make cloaths for 
themselves and their families. Even the independent workmen do 
not always work for public sale, but are employed by some of their 
neighbours in manufactures for family use. The produce of their 
labour, therefore, frequently makes no figure in those public reg- 
isters of which the records are sometimes published with so much 
parade, and from which our merchants and manufacturers would 
often vainly pretend to announce the prosperity or declension of 
the greatest empires. 

Though the variations in the price of labour, not only do not al- 
ways correspond with those in the price of provisions, but are 
frequently quite opposite, we must not, upon this account, imagine 
that the price of provisions has no influence upon that of labour. 
The money price of labour is necessarily regulated by two circum- 
stances; the demand for labour, and the price of the necessaries 
and conveniencies of life. The demand for labour, according as it 
happens to be increasing, stationary, or declining, or to require an 
increasing, stationary, or declining population, determines the 
quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies of life which must 
be given to the labourer; and the money price of labour is de- 
termined by what is requisite for purchasing this quantity. Though 
the money price of labour, therefore, is sometimes high where the 
price of provisions is low, it would be still higher, the demand con- 
tinuing the same, if the price of provisions was high. 

It is because the demand for labour increases in years of sudden 
and extraordinary plenty, and diminishes in those of sudden and 
extraordinary scarcity, that the money price of labour sometimes 
rises in the one, and sinks in the other. 

In a year of sudden and extraordinary plenty, there are funds in 
the hands of many of the employers of industry, suflicient to main- 
tain and employ a greater number of industrious people than had 
been employed the year before; and this extraordinary number 
cannot always be had. Those masters, therefore, who want more 
workmen, bid against one another, in order to get them, which 


The pro- 
duce de- 
pends on 
other cir- 
cum- 
stances, 
and more 
of it es- 
capes be- 
ing reck- 
oned in 
cheap 
years. 


There is, 
however, 
a con- 
nexion 
between 
the price 
of labour 
and that 
of provi- 
sions. 


In years 
of plenty 
there is a 
greater 
demand 
for la- 
bour, 



and in 
years of 
scarcity a 
less de- 
mand, 


and the 
effect of 
variations 
in the 
price of 
provisions 
is thus 
counter- 
balanced. 


Increase 

of wages 

increases 

prices, 

but the 

cause of 

increased 

wages 

tends to 

diminish 

prices. 


86 the wealth of NATIONS 

sometimes raises both the real and the money price of their labour. 

The contrary of this happens in a year of sudden and extraor- 
dinary scarcity. The funds destined for employing industry are less 
than they had been the year before. A considerable number of peo- 
ple are thrown out of employment, who bid against one another, in 
order to get it, which sometimes lowers both the real and the money 
price of labour. In 1740, a year of extraordinary scarcity, many 
people were willing to work for bare subsistence. In the succeeding 
years of plenty, it was more difficult to get labourers and servants. 

The scarcity of a dear year, by diminishing the demand for la- 
bour, tends to lower its price, as the high price of provisions tends 
to raise it. The plenty of a cheap year, on the contrary, by increas- 
ing the demand, tends to raise the price of labour, as the cheapness 
of provisions tends to lower it. In the ordinary variations of the 
price of provisions, those two opposite causes seem to counterbal- 
ance one another; which is probably in part the reason why the 
wages of labour are every-where so much more steady and per- 
manent than the price of provisions. 

The increase in the wages of labour necessarily increases the 
price of many commodities, by increasing that part of it which re- 
solves itself into wages, and so far tends to diminish their consump- 
tion both at home and abroad. The same cause, however, which 
raises the wages of labour, the increase of stock, tends to increase 
its productive powers, and to make a smaller quantity of labour 
produce a greater quantity of work. The owner of the stock which 
employs a great number of labourers, necessarily endeavours, for 
his own advantage, to make such a proper division and distribution 
of employment, that they may be enabled to produce the greatest 
quantity of work possible. For the same reason, he endeavours to 
supply them with the best machinery which either he or they can 
think of. What takes place among the labourers in a particular 
workhouse, takes place, for the same reason, among those of a 
great society. The greater their number, the more they naturally 
divide themselves into different classes and subdivisions of employ- 
ment. More heads are occupied in inventing the most proper ma- 
chinery for executing the work of each, and it is, therefore, more 
likely to be invented. There are many commodities, therefore, 
which, in consequence of these improvements, come to be produced 
by so much less labour than before, that the increase of its price 
is more than compensated by the diminution of its quantity 

Ed. I reads “that the increase of its price does not compensate the dim- 
inution of its quantity.” The meaning is that the increase in the amount paid 
for a given quantity of labour is more than counterbalanced by the diminu- 
tion in the quantity required. The statement is repeated below, p. 242, 243. 



CHAPTER IX 


OF THE PROFITS OF STOCK 

The rise and fall in the profits of stock depend upon the same 
causes with the rise and fall in the wages of labour, the increasing 
or declining state of the wealth of the society; but those causes 
affect the one and the other very differently. 

The increase of stock, which raises wages, tends to lower profit. 
When the stocks of many rich merchants are turned into the same 
trade, their mutual competition naturally tends to lower its profit; 
and when there is a like increase of stock in all the different trades 
carried on in the some society, the same competition must produce 
the same effect in them all.^ 

It is not easy, it has already been observed, to ascertain what are 
the average wages of labour even in a particular place, and at a 
particular time. We can, even in this case, seldom determine more 
than what are the most usual wages. But even this can seldom be 
done with regard to the profits of stock. Profit is so very fluctuat- 
ing, that the person who carries on a particular trade cannot always 
tell you himself what is the average of his annual profit. It is af- 
fected, not only by every variation of price in the commodities 
which he deals in, but by the good or bad fortune both of his 
rivals and of his customers, and by a thousand other accidents to 
which goods when carried either by sea or by land, or even when 
stored in a warehouse, are liable. It varies, therefore, not only from 
year to year, but from day to day, and almost from hour to hour. 
To ascertain what is the average profit of all the different trades 
carried on in a great kingdom, must be much more difficult; and to 
judge of what it may have been formerly, or in remote periods of 
time, with any degree of precision, must be altogether impossible. 

'•This statement is somewhat amplified below, p. 336, where the increas- 
ing intensity of the competition between the owners of capital is attributed 
to the gradually increasing difficulty of finding “a profitable method of em- 
ploying any new capital.” 


Profits de- 
pend on 
increase 
and de- 
crease of 
wealth, 

falling 
with the 
increase 
of wealth. 


The rate is 
difficult 
to ascer- 
tain, 



but may 
be in- 
ferred 
from the 
rate of in- 
terest, 


which has 
fallen in 
England, 


88 the wealth^ of NATIONS 

But though it may be impossible to determine with any degree 
of precision, what are or were the average profits of stock, either 
in the present, or in ancient times, some notion may be formed of 
them from the interest of money It may be laid down as a maxim, 
that wherever a great deal can be made by the use of money, a 
great deal will commonly be given for the use of it; and that wher- 
ever little can be made by it, less will commonly be given for it.^ 
According, therefore, as lie usual market rate of interest varies in 
any country, we may be assured that the ordinary profits of stock 
must vary with it, fnust sink as it sinks, and rise as it rises. The 
progress of interest, therefore, may lead us to form some notion 
of the progress of profit. 

By the 37th of Henry VIII.'* all interest above ten per cent, was 
declared unlawful. More, it seems, had sometimes been taken be- 
fore that. In the reign of Edward VI. religious zeal prohibited all 
interest.^ This prohibition, however, like all others of the same 
kind, is said to have produced no effect, and probably rather in- 
creased than diminished the evil of usury. The statute of Henry 
VIII. was revived by the 13th of Elizabeth, cap. 8.® and ten per 
cent, continued to be the legal rate of interest till the 21st of James 
when it was restricted to eight per cent. It was reduced to six 
per cent, soon after the restoration,® and by the 12th of Queen 

® Defined above, p. 52. 

® But that interest will not always bear the same proportion to profit is 
recognised below, pp. 96, 97, 

* C. 9, “an act against usury.” On the ground that previous Acts and laws 
had been obscure it repeals them all, and prohibits the repurchase of goods 
sold within three months before, and the obtaining by any device more than 
10 per cent, per annum for forbearing payment of money. Its real effect was 
to legalise interest up to 10 per cent. 

® 5 & 6 Ed. VI., c. 20, forbade all interest, and repealed 37 Hen. VIII., c. 
9, alleging in its preamble that that Act was not intended to allow usury, as 
“divers persons blinded with inordinate love of themselves” imagined, but 
was intended against all usury, “and yet nevertheless the same was by the 
said act permitted for the avoiding of a more ill and inconvenience that be- 
fore that time was used.” 

® On the ground that 5 & 6 Ed. VI., c. 20, “hath not done so much good 
as was hoped it should but rather the said vice of usury and especially by 
way of sale of wares and shifts of interest hath much more exceedingly 
abounded to the utter undoing of many gentlemen, merchants, occupiers and 
other.” 

^ C. 17, which alleges that the fall of prices which had taken place made 
the maintenance of “so high a rate” as 10 per cent, prejudicial to agriculture 
and commerce, and therefore reduces the maximum to 8 per cent, for the fu- 
ture. It concludes with the very empty proviso that “no words in this law 
contained shall be construed or expounded to allow the practice of usury in 
point of religion or conscience.” 

® It had already been so reduced by a Commonwealth Act of Parliament, 
passed in August, 1651, which adopts the reasons given by 21 Jac. L, c. 17. 
But of course this, like other Acts of the Commonwealth, had to be ignored 



PROFITS OF STOCK ^9 

Anne,^ to five per cent. All these different statutory regulations 
seem to have been made with great propriety. They seem to have 
followed and not to have gone before the market rate of interest, or 
the rate at which people of good credit usually borrowed. Since the 
time of Queen Anne, five per cent, seems to have been rather above 
than below the market rate. Before the late war,^^ the government 
borrowed at three per cent.; and people of good credit in the 
capital, and in many other parts of the kingdom, at three and a 
half, four, and four and a half per cent. 

Since the time of Henry VIII. the wealth and revenue of the 
country have been continually advancing, and, in the course of 
their progress, their pace seems rather to have been gradually ac- 
celerated than retarded. They seem, not only to have been going on, 
but to have been going on faster and faster.^^ The wages of labour 
have been continually increasing during the same period, and in 
the greater part of the different branches of trade and manufac- 
tures the profits of stock have been diminishing. 

It generally requires a greater stock to carry on any sort of trade 
in a great town than in a country village. The great stocks em- 
ployed in every branch of trade, and Idle number of rich com- 

by the Restoration Parliament, which, by 12 Car. IL, c. 13, re-made the re- 
duction on the grounds that the abatement of interest from 10 per cent, “in 
former times hath been found by notable experience beneficial to the ad- 
vancement of trade and improvement of lands by good husbandry, with 
many other considerable advantages to this nation, especially the reducing 
of it to a nearer proportion with foreign states with whom we traffic,” and 
because “in fresh memory the like fall from eight to six in the hundred by a 
late constant practice hath found the like success to the general contentment 
of this nation as is visible by several improvements,” while “it is the en- 
deavour of some at present to reduce it back again in practice to the allow- 
ance of the statute still in force to eight in the hundred to the great discour- 
agement of ingenuity and industry in the husbandry trade and commerce of 
this nation.” 

®By 12 Ann. st. 2, c. 16, which speaks of the benefit to trade and agricul- 
ture resulting from the earlier reductions, of the burdens which the war had 
laid on landowners, and of the decay of foreign trade owing to the high in- 
terest and profit of money at home, which things made it “absolutely neces- 
sary to reduce the high rate of interest” to a nearer proportion with the in- 
terest allowed in foreign states. 

^®That of 1756-1763. 

Holders of 4 per cent, annuities who declined to accept in exchange new 
stock bearing interest for some years at 3-5 and afterwards at 3 per cent, 
were paid off by means of money raised by a 3 per cent, loan in 1750. See 
Sinclair, History of the Public Revenue, 1785, pt. ii., p. 113. From that time 
till the beginning of 1755 the 3 per cents, were usually above par. Then they 
gradually sank to 63 in January, 1762; rose to 96 in March, 1763; fell again 
to 80 in October, 1764; after that they were seldom above 90 before the pub- 
lication of the Wealth of Nations (Sinclair, op. cit., pt. iii., 1790, Appendix 
iii.) . The policy of a legal regulation of interest is discussed below, pp. 339, 
340. 

Below, pp. 327, 328. 


while 
wealth 
has been 
increasing. 


Profits are 
lower in 
towns, 
where 



there is 
much 
stock, 
than in 
the coun- 
try, where 
there is 
little. 


Interest is 
higher in 
Scotland, 
a poor 
country, 
than in 
England. 


So too in 
France, a 
country 
probably 
less rich 
than Eng- 
land, 


90 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

petitors, generally reduce the rate of profit in the former below 
what it is in the latter. But the wages of labour are generally high- 
er in a great town than in a country village. In a thriving town the 
people who have great stocks to employ, frequently cannot get 
the number of workmen they want, and therefore bid against one 
another in order to get as many as they can, which raises the 
wages of labour, and lowers the profits of stock. In the remote 
parts of the country there is frequently not stock sufficient to em- 
ploy all the people, who therefore bid against one another in order 
to get employment, which lowers the wages of labour, and raises 
the profits of stock. 

In Scotland, though the legal rate of interest is the same as in 
England, the market rate is rather higher. People of the best credit 
there seldom borrow under five per cent. Even private bankers in 
Edinburgh give four per cent, upon their promissory notes, of 
which payment either in whole or in part may be demanded at 
pleasure. Private bankers in London give no interest for the money 
which is deposited with them. There are few trades which cannot 
be carried on with a smaller stock in Scotland than in England. 
The common rate of profit, therefore, must be somewhat greater. 
The wages of labour, it has already been observed, are lower in 
Scotland than in England.^® The country too is not only much 
poorer, but the steps by which it advances to a better condition, 
for it is evidently advancing, seem to be much slower and more 
tardy.^^ 

The legal rate of interest in France has nOt, during the course of 
the present century, been always regulated by the market rate.’"' 
In 1720 interest was reduced from the twentieth to the fiftieth 
penny, or from five to two per cent. In 1724 it was raised to the 
thirtieth penny, or to 3^ per cent. In 1725 it was again raised to 
the twentieth penny, or to five per cent. In 1766, during the ad- 
ministration of Mr. Laverdy, it was reduced to the twenty-fifth 
penny, or to four per cent. The Abbe Terray raised it afterwards 
to the old rate of five per cent. The supposed purpose of many of 
those violent reductions of interest was to prepare the way for re- 
ducing that of the public debts; a purpose which has sometimes 
been executed. France is perhaps in the present times not so rich a 
country as England; and though the legal rate of interest has in 
France frequently been lower than in England, the market rate has 

Above, p. 75. “Below, p. 189. 

^®See Denisart, Article Taux des Interets, tom. iii. p, 18. J. B. Denisait, 
Collection de decisions nouvettes et de notions relatives d la jurisprudence ac- 
tuelle, 7th ed., 1771, s.v. Interet, subdivision Taux des Interets. This does not 
go so far as the reduction of 1766. The note appears first in ed. 2. 



PROFITS OF STOCK 9^ 

generally been higher; for there, as in other countries, they have 
several very safe and easy methods of evading the law.^*^ The profits 
of trade, I have been assured by British merchants who had traded 
in both countries, are higher in France than in England; and it is 
no doubt upon this account that many British subjects chuse rather 
to employ their capitals in a country where trade is in disgrace, than 
in one where it is highly respected. The wages of labour are lower in 
France than in England. When you go from Scotland to England, 
the difference which you may remark between the dress and coun- 
tenance of the common people in the one country and in the other, 
sufficiently indicates the difference in their condition. The contrast 
is still greater when you return from France. France, though no 
doubt a richer country than Scotland, seems not to be going forward 
so fast. It is a common and even a popular opinion in the country, 
that it is going backwards; an opinion which, I apprehend, is ill- 
founded even with regard to France, but which nobody can pos- 
sibly entertain with regard to Scotland, who sees the country now, 
and who saw it twenty or thirty years ago. 

The province of Holland, on the other hand, in proportion to the 
extent of its territory and the number of its people, is a richer coun- 
try than England. The government there borrows at two per cent., 
and private people of good credit at three. The wages of labour are 
said to be higher in Holland than in England, and the Dutch, it is 
well known, trade upon lower profits than any people in Europe. 
The trade of Holland, it has been pretended by some people, is 
decaying, and it may perhaps be true that some particular branches 
of it are so. But these symptoms seem to indicate sufficiently that 
there is no general decay. When profit diminishes, merchants are 
very apt to complain that trade decays; though the diminution of 
profits is the natural effect of its prosperity, or of a greater stock 
being employed in it than before. During the late war the Dutch 
gained the whole carrying trade of France, of which they still re- 
tain a very large share. The great property which they possess both 
in the French and English funds, about forty millions, it is said, in 
the latter (in which I suspect, however, there is a considerable ex- 
aggeration) the great sums which they lend to private people in 

Below, p. 340. 

Postlethwayt, Dictionary of Commerce, 2nd ed., 1757, vol. i., p. 877, s.v. 
Funds, says that the amount of British funds held by foreigners has been 
estimated by some at one-fifth and by others at one-fourth of the whole 
debt. But Magens, Universal Merchant (ed. Horsley), 1753, p, 13, thought 
it “more than probable that foreigners are not concerned in anything like 
one-fourth.’’ He had been informed “that most of the money which the 
Dutch have here is in Bank, East India and South Sea stocks, and that their 
interest in them might amount to one-third of the whole.” Fairman, Account 


but lower 
in Hol- 
land, 
which is 
richer 
than Eng- 
land. 



In the pe- 
culiar case 
of new 
colonies 
high 

wages and 
high pro- 
fits go to- 
gether, 
but pro- 
fits gradu- 
ally di- 
minish. 


92 the wealth of nations 

countries where the rate of interest is higher than in their own, are 
circumstances which no doubt demonstrate the redundancy of their 
stock, or that it has increased beyond what they can employ with 
tolerable profit in the proper business of their own country: but 
they do not demonstrate that that business has decreased. As the 
capital of a private man, though acquired by a particular trade, 
may increase beyond what he can employ in it, and yet that trade 
continue to increase too; so may likewise the capital of a great 
nation. 

In our North American and West Indian colonies, not only the 
wages of labour, but the interest of money, and consequently the 
profits of stock, are higher than in England. In the different col- 
onies both the legal and the market rate of interest run from six to 
eight per cent. High wages of labour and high profits of stock, how- 
ever, are things, perhaps, which scarce ever go together, except in 
the peculiar circumstances of new colonies. A new colony must al- 
ways for some time be more under-stocked in proportion to the 
extent of its territory, and more under-peopled in proportion to the 
extent of its stock, than the greater part of other countries. They 
have more land than they have stock to cultivate. What they have, 
therefore, is applied to the cultivation only of what is most fertile 
and most favourably situated, the land near the sea shore, and 
along the banks of navigable rivers. Such land too is frequently 
purchased at a price below the value even of its natural produce. 
Stock employed in the purchase and improvement of such lands 
must yield a very large profit, and consequently afford to pay a 
very large interest. Its rapid accumulation in so profitable an em- 
ployment enables the planter to increase the number of his hands 
faster than he can find them in a new settlement. Those whom he 
can find, therefore, are very liberally rewarded. As the colony in- 
creases, the profits of stock gradually diminish. When the most 
fertile and best situated lands have been all occupied, less profit 
can be made by the cultivation of what is inferior both in soil and 

of the Public Funds, 7th ed., 1824, p. 229, quotes “an account drawn up in 
the year 1762, showing how much of the several funds transferable at the 
Bank of England then stood in the names of foreigners,” which is also in 
Sinclair, History of the Public Revenue, pt. iii., 1790, p. 366. From this it 
appears that foreigners held £4,627,858 of Bank stock and £10,328,537 in the 
other funds, which did not include South Sea and East India stock. Fairman 
had reason to believe that the South Sea holding amounted to £2,500,000 and 
the East Indian to more than £500,000, which would make in all about 
£18,000,000. In 1806, he says, the total claiming exemption from income tax 
(foreigners were exempt) was £18,500,000, but this did not include Bank 
stock 

“Eds, 1-3 read “lapds.” 



93 


PROFITS OF STOCK 

situation, and less interest can be afforded for the stock which is 
so employed. In the greater part of our colonies, accordingly, both 
the legal and the market rate of interest have been considerably re- 
duced during the course of the present century. As riches, improve- 
ment, and population have increased, interest has declined. The 
wages of labour do not sink with the profits of slock. The demand 
for labour increases with the increase of stock whatever be its 
profits; and after these are diminished, stock may not only con- 
tinue to increase, but to increase much faster than before. It is with 
industrious nations who are advancing in the acquisition of riches, 
as with industrious individuals. A great stock, though with small 
profits, generally increases faster than a small stock with great 
profits. Money, says the proverb, makes money. When you have 
got a little, it is often easy to get more. The great difficulty is to get 
that little. The connection between the increase of stock and that 
of industry, or of the demand for useful labour, has partly been 
explained already,^^ but will be explained more fully hereafter in 
treating of the accumulation of stock. 

The acquisition of new territory, or of new branches of trade, Newterri- 
may sometimes raise the profits of stock, and with them the interest 
of money, even in a country which is fast advancing in the acqui- may raise 
sition of riches. The stock of the country not being sufficient for the 
whole accession of business, which such acquisitions present to the country^ 
different people among whom it is divided, is applied to those par- advancing 
ticular branches only which afford the greatest profit. Part of what 
had before been employed in other trades, is necessarily withdrawn 
from them, and turned into some of the new and more profitable 
ones. In all those old trades, therefore, the competition comes to be 
less than before. The market comes to be less fully supplied with 
many different sorts of goods. Their price necessarily rises more or 
less, and yields a greater profit to those who deal in them, who can, 
therefore, afford to borrow at a higher interest. For some time after 
the conclusion of the late war, not only private people of the best 
credit, but some of the greatest companies in London, commonly 
borrowed at five per cent, who before that had not been used to pay 
more than four, and four and a half per cent. The great accession 
both of territory and trade, by our acquisitions in North America 
and the West Indies, will sufficiently account for this, without sup- 
posing any diminution in the capital stock of the society. So great 
an accession of new business to be carried on by the old stock, must 
necessarily have diminished the quantity employed in a great num- 

“ Below, pp. 314-332. 


Above, pp. 64-68. 



Diminu- 
tion of 
capital 
stock 
raises pro- 
fits. 


In a coun- 
try as rich 
as it pos- 
sibly 
could be, 
profits as 
well as 
wages 
would be 
very low, 


94 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ber of particular branches, in which the competition being less, the 
profits must have been greater. I shall hereafter have occasion to 
mention the reasons which dispose me to believe that the capital 
stock of Great Britain was not diminished even by the enormous 
expence of the late war. 

The diminution of the capital stock of the society, or of the 
funds destined for the maintenance of industry, however, as it low- 
ers the wages of labour, so it raises the profits of stock, and con- 
sequently the interest of money. By the wages of labour being 
lowered, the owners of what stock remains in the society can bring 
their goods at less expence to market than before, and less stock 
being employed in supplying the market than before, they can sell 
them dearer.-- Their goods cost them less, and they get more for 
them. Their profits, therefore, being augmented at both ends, can 
well af ord a large interest. The great fortunes so suddenly and so 
easily acquired in Bengal and the other British settlements in the 
East Indies, may satisfy us that, as the wages of labour are very 
low, so the profits of stock are very high in those ruined countries. 
The interest of money is proportionably so. In Bengal, money is 
frequently lent to the farmers at forty, fifty, and sixty per cent, 
and the succeeding crop is mortgaged for the payment. As the 
profits which can afford such an interest must eat up almost the 
whole rent of the landlord, so such enormous usury must in its turn 
eat up the greater part of those profits. Before the fall of the Ro- 
man republic, a usury of the same kind seems to have been common 
in the provinces, under the ruinous administration of their procon- 
suls. The virtuous Brutus lent money in Cyprus at eight-and- 
forty per cent, as we learn from the letters of Cicero.^"^ 

In a country which had acquired that full complement of riches 
which the nature of its soil and climate, and its situation with re- 
spect to other countries, allowed it to acquire; which could, there- 
fore, advance no further, and which was not going backwards, both 
the wages of labour and the profits of stock would probably be very 
low. In a country fully peopled in proportion to what either its ter- 
ritory could maintain or its stock employ, the competition for em- 
ployment would necessarily be so great as to reduce the wages of 

^ Below, pp. 328, 329, 881. Eds. i and 2 read ^‘cheaper.” 

“ Ed. I reads “five and forty,” 8 having? probably been misread as 5. 

Ad Atticum, VI., i., s, 6. Cicero had arranged that a six-year-old debt 
should be repaid with interest at the rate of 12 per cent, per annum, the 
principal being increased by that amount for each of the six years. This 
would have very nearly doubled the principal, but Brutus, through ^is 
agent, kept asking for 48 per cent., which would have multiplied it by more 
^an fifteen. However, Cicero asserted that the 12 per cent, would have sat- 
isfied the cruellest usurers. 



PROFITS OF STOCK 95 

labour to what was barely sufficient to keep up the number of la- 
bourers, and, the country being already fully peopled, that number 
could never be augmented. In a country fully stocked in proportion 
to all the business it had to transact, as great a quantity of stock 
would be employed in every particular branch as the nature and 
extent of the trade would admit. The competition, therefore, would 
every-where be as great, and consequently the ordinary profit as 
low as possible. 

But perhaps no country has ever yet arrived at this degree of 
opulence. China seems to have been long stationary, and had prob- 
ably long ago acquired that full complement of riches which is con- 
sistent with the nature of its laws and institutions. But this com- 
plement may be much inferior to what, with other laws and 
institutions, the nature of its soil, climate, and situation might ad- 
mit of. A country which neglects or despises foreign commerce, and 
which admits the vessels of foreign nations into one or two of its 
ports only, cannot transact the same quantity of business which it 
might do with different laws and institutions. In a country too, 
where, though the rich or the owners of large capitals enjoy a good 
deal of security, the poor or the owners of small capitals enjoy 
scarce any, but are liable, under the pretence of justice, to be pil- 
laged and plundered at any time by the inferior mandarines, the 
quantity of stock employed in all the different branches of business 
transacted within it, can never be equal to what the nature and ex- 
tent of that business might admit. In every different branch, the 
oppression of the poor must establish the monopoly of the rich, 
who, by engrossing the whole trade to themselves, will be able to 
make very large profits. Twelve per cent, accordingly is said to be 
the common interests of money in China, and the ordinary profits 
of stock must be sufficient to afford this large interest. 

A defect in the law may sometimes raise the rate of interest con- 
siderably above what the condition of the country, as to wealth or 
poverty, would require. When the law doe^ not enforce the per- 
formance of contracts, it puts all borrowers nearly upon the same 
footing with bankrupts or people of doubtful credit in better regu- 
lated countries. The uncertainty of recovering his money makes the 
lender exact the same usurious interest which is usually required 
from bankrupts. Among the barbarous nations who over-ran the 
western provinces of the Roman empire, the performance of con- 
tracts was left for many ages to the faith of the contracting 
parties.^'" The courts of justice of their kings seldom intermeddled 
in it. The high rate of interest which took place in those 

^Lectures, pp. 130-134. 


but there 
has never 
yet been 
any such 
country. 


Interest is 
raised by 
defective 
enforce- 
ment of 
contracts. 



and by 
prohibi- 
tion. 


The low- 
est rate of 
profit 
must be 
more than 
enough to 
compen- 
sate 
losses, 

and so 
must the 
lowest 
rate of in- 
terest. 


In a coun- 
try as rich 
as it pos- 
sibly 
could be 
interest 
would be 
so low 
that only 
the 

wealthiest 
people 
could live 
on it. 


96 the wealth of nations 

ancient times may perhaps be partly accounted for from this cause. 

When the law prohibits interest altogether, it does not prevent it. 
Many people must borrow, and nobody will lend without such a 
consideration for the use of their money as is suitable, not only to 
what can be made by the use of it, but to the difficulty and danger 
of evading the law. The high rate of interest among all Mahometan 
nations is accounted for by Mr. Montesquieu, not from their pov- 
erty, but partly from this,^® and partly from the difficulty of re- 
covering the money 

The lowest ordinary rate of profit must always be something 
more than what is sufficient to compensate the occasional losses to 
which every employment of stock is exposed. It is this surplus only 
which is neat or clear profit. What is called gross profit compre- 
hends frequently, not only this surplus, but what is retained for 
compensating such extraordinary losses. The interest which the 
borrower can afford to pay is in proportion to the clear profit only. 

The lowest ordinary rate of interest must, in the same manner, 
be something more than sufficient to compensate the occasional 
losses to which lending, even with tolerable prudence, is exposed. 
Were it not more, charity or friendship could be the only motives 
for lending. 

In a country which had acquired its full complement of riches, 
where in every particular branch of business there was the greatest 
quantity of stock that could be employed in it, as the ordinary rate 
of clear profit would be very small, so the usual market rate of in- 
terest which could be afforded out of it, would be so low as to 
render it impossible for any but the very wealthiest people to live 
upon the interest of their money. All people of small or middling 
fortunes would be obliged to superintend themselves the employ- 
ment of their own stocks. It would be necessary that almost every 
man should be a man of business, or engage in some sort of trade. 
The province of -Holland seems to be approaching near to this 
state. It is there unfashionable not to be a man of business.^® 
Necessity makes it usual for almost every man to be so, and custom 
every where regulates fashion. As it is ridiculous not to dress, so is 

“/.e., the danger of evading the law. 

'-^Esprit des lois, liv. xxii., ch. 19, “L’usure augmentc dans les pays ma- 
hometans a proportion de la severite de la defense: le pr8teur slndemnise du 
peril de la contravention. Dans ces pays d’Orient, la plupart des hommes 
n’ont rien d^assur^; il n’y a presque point de rapport entre la possession ac- 
tuelle d’une somme et Tesperance de la ravoir apr^s Tavoir pret^e: I’usure y 
augmente done k proportion du peril de l’insolvabilit6,” 

^Joshua Gee, Trade and Navigation of Great Britain Considered, 1729, 
p. 128, notices the fact of the Dutch being all engaged in trade and ascribes 
it to the deficiency of valuable land. 



97 


PROFITS OF STOCK 

it, in some measure, not to be employed, like other people. As a 
man of a civil profession seems awkward in a camp or a garrison, 
and is even in some danger of being despised there, so does an idle 
man among men of business. 

The highest ordinary rate of profit may be such as, in the price 
of the greater part of commodities, eats up the whole of what should 
go to the rent of the land, and leaves only what is sufficient to pay 
the labour of preparing and bringing them to market, according to 
the lowest rate at which labour can any-where be paid, the bare sub- 
sistence of the labourer. The workman must always have been fed 
in some way or other while he was about the work; but the land- 
lord may not always have been paid. The profits of the trade which 
the servants of the East India Company carry on in Bengal may 
not perhaps be very far from this rate.^® 

The proportion which the usual market rate of interest ought to 
bear to the ordinary rate of clear profit, necessarily varies as profit 
rises or falls. Double interest is in Great Britain reckoned, what the 
merchants call, a good, moderate, reasonable profit; terms which I 
apprehend mean no more than a common and usual profit. In a 
country where the ordinary rate of clear profit is eight or ten per 
cent., it may be reasonable that one half of it should go to interest, 
wherever business is carried on with borrowed money. The stock is 
at the risk of the borrower, who, as it were, insures it to the lender; 
and four or five per cent, may, in the greater part of trades, be both 
a sufficient profit upon the risk of this insurance, and a sufficient 
recompence for the trouble of employing the stock. But the pro- 
portion between interest and clear profit might not be the same in 
countries where the ordinary rate of profit was either a good deal 
lower, or a good deal higher. If it were a good deal lower, one half 
of it perhaps could not be afforded for interest; and more might be 
afforded if it were a good deal higher. 

In countries which are fast advancing to riches, the low rate of 
profit may, in the price of many commodities, compensate the high 
wages of labour, and enable those countries to sell as cheap as their 
less thriving neighbours, among whom the wages of labour may be 
lower. 

In reality high profits tend much more to raise the price of work 
than high wages. If in the linen manufacture, for example, the 
wages of the different working people, the flax-dressers, the spin- 
ners, the weavers, &c. should, all of them, be advanced two pence a 
day; it would be necessary to heighten the price of a piece of linen 
only by a number of two pences equal to the number of people that 

See below, pp. 603-605. 


The high- 
est rate of 
profit 
would eat 
up all rent 
and leave 
only 
wages. 


The pro- 
portion of 
interest to 
profit 
rises and 
falls with 
the rate of 
profit. 


Countries 
with low 
profits 
can sell as 
cheap as 
those with 
low 
wages; 
and in 
reality 
high pro- 
fits tend 
to raise 
prices 
more than 



high 

wages. 


9 ^ the wealth of nations 

had been employed about it, multiplied by the number of days 
during which they had been so employed. That part of the price of 
the commodity which resolved itself into wages would, through all 
the different stages of the manufacture, rise only in arithmetical 
proportion to this rise of wages. But if the profits of all the differ- 
ent employers of those working people should be raised five per 
cent, that part of the price of the commodity which resolved itself 
into profit, would, through all the different stages of the manufac- 
ture, rise in geometrical proportion to this rise of profit. The em- 
ployer of the flax-dressers would in selling his flax require an 
additional five per cent, upon the whole value of the materials and 
wages which he advanced to his workmen. The employer of the 
spinners would require an additional five per cent, both upon the 
advanced price of the flax and upon the wages of the spinners. And 
the employer of the weavers would require a like five per cent, both 
upon the advanced price of the linen yarn and upon the wages of 
the weavers. In raising the price of commodities the rise of wages 
operates in the same manner as simple interest does in the accumu- 
lation of debt. The rise of profit operates like compound interest.^® 
Our merchants and master-manufacturers complain much of the 
bad effects of high wages in raising the price, and thereby lessening 
the sale of their goods both at home and abroad. They say nothing 
concerning the bad effects of high profits. They are silent with re- 
gard to the pernicious effects of their own gains. They complain 
only of those of other people.^^ 

According to the view of the subject here set forth, if the three employ- 
ers each spend iioo in wages and materials, and profits are at first s per 
cent, and then rise to lo per cent., the finished commodity must rise from 
£331 os. 3d. to £364 2S., while if, on the other hand, the wages rise from £100 
to £ios, the commodity will only rise to £347 ns. 3d. It is assumed either 
that profits mean profits on turn-over and not on capital per annum, or else 
that the employers each have their capital turned over once a year. But even 
when one or other of these assumptions is granted, it is clear that the “simple 
interest” may easily be greater than the “compound.” In the examples just 
given we doubled profits, but only added one-twentieth to wages. If we 
double wages and leave profits at $ per cent., the commodity should rise 
from £331 os. 3d. to £662 os. 6d. 

^ This paragraph is not in ed. i ; the epigram at the end, however, did not 
make its appearance here for the first time in ed. 2, since it occurs in a slightly 
less polished form below, p. 566. 





CHAPTER X 


OF WAGES AND PROFIT IN THE DIFFERENT EMPLOYMENTS OF LABOUR 
AND STOCK ^ 


The whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the different 
employments of labour and stock must, in the same neighbour- 
hood, be either perfectly equal or continually tending to equality. 
If in the same neighbourhood, there was any employment evidently 
either ^ more or less advantageous than the rest, so many people 
would crowd into it in the one case, and so many would desert it in 
the other, that its advantages would soon return to the level of 
other employments. This at least would be the case in a society 
where things were left to follow their natural course, where there 
was perfect liberty,^ and where every man was perfectly free both 
to chuse what occupation he thought proper, and to change it as 
often as he thought proper. Every man’s interest would prompt him 
lo seek the advantageous, and to shun the disadvantageous em- 
oloyment. 

Pecuniary wages and profit, indeed, are every-where in Europe 
extremely different according to the different employments of la- 
bour and stock. But this difference arises partly from certain cir- 
cumstances in the employments themselves, which, either really, or 
at least in the imaginations of men, make up for a small pecuniary 
gain in some, and counter-balance a great one in others; and partly 
from the policy of Europe, which no-where leaves things at perfect 
hberty. 

The particular consideration of those circumstances and of that 
policy will divide this chapter into two parts. 

^The general design of this chapter, as well as many of its details, was 
doubtless suggested by Cantillon, Essai, pt. i, chaps, vii. and viii. The first 
of these chapters is headed: “Le travail d’un laboureur vaut moins que celui 
d’un artisan,” and the second: “Les artisans gagnent les uns plus les autres 
moins selon les cas et les circonstances differentes.” The second ends thus: 
“Par ces inductions et cent autres qu’on pourrait tirer de Texperience ordi- 
naire, on peut voir facilement que la difference de prix qu’on paie pour le 
travail joumalier est fondee sur des raisons naturelles et sensibles.” 

“Ed. I reads “either evidently.” ® Above pp. 56, 62. 


Advan- 
tages and 
disadvan- 
tages tend 
to equal- 
ity where 
there is 
perfect 
liberty. 


Actual 
differences 
of pecu- 
niary 
wages and 
profits are 
due partly 
to count- 
erbalanc- 
ing dr- 
cura- 
stances 
and partly 
to want 
of perfect 
liberty. 


99 



There are 
five 

counter- 

balancing 

circum- 

stances: 


(i) Wages 
vary with 
the agree- 
ableness 
of the em- 
ployment 


Some very 
agreeable 
employ- 


100 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Parti 

Inequalities arising from the Nature of the Employments them- 
selves ^ 

The five following are the principal circumstances which, so far as 
I have been able to observe, make up for a small pecuniary gain 
in some employments, and counter-balance a great one in others: 
first, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments 
themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty 
and expence of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or incon- 
stancy of employment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust 
which must be reposed in those who exercise them; and fifthly, the 
probability or improbability of success in them. 

First, The wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the 
cleanliness or dirtiness, the honourableness or dishonourableness of 
the employment. Thus in most places, take the year round, a jour- 
neyman taylor earns less than a journeyman weaver. His work is 
much easier. A journeyman weaver earns less than a journeyman 
smith. His work is not always easier, but it is much cleanlier. A 
journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns so much 
in twelve hours as a collier, who is only a labourer, does in eight. 
His work is not quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is carried on in 
day-light, and above ground. Honour makes a great part of the re- 
ward of all honourable professions. In point of pecuniary gain, all 
things considered, they are generally under-recompensed, as I shall 
endeavour to show by and by.^ Disgrace has the contrary effect. 
The trade of a butcher is a brutal and an odious business; but it is 
in most places more profitable than the greater part of common 
trades. The most detestable of all employments, that of public ex- 
ecutioner, is, in proportion to the quantity of work done, better 
paid than any common trade whatever. 

Hunting and fishing, the most important employments of man- 
kind in the rude state of society, become in its advanced state their 

'‘The foregoing introductory paragraphs would lead a logical reader to 
expect part i of the chapter to be entitled. “Inequalities of pecuniary wages 
and profit which merely counterbalance inequalities of other advantages and 
disadvantages.” The rather obscure tide actually chosen is due to the fact 
that nearly a quarter of the part is occupied by a discussion of three further 
conditions which must be present in addition to “perfect freedom” in order 
to bring about the equality of total advantages and disadvantages. The chap- 
ter would have been clearer if this discussion had been placed at the begin- 
ning, but it was probably an afterthought. 

® Below, pp. 105-107. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

most agreeable amusements, and they pursue for pleasure what 
they once followed from necessity. In the advanced state of society, 
therefore, they are all very poor people who follow as a trade, what 
other people pursue as a pastime. Fishermen have been so since the 
time of ^ Theocritus. A poacher is every-where a very poor man in 
Great Britain. In countries where the rigour of the law suffers no 
poachers, the licensed hunter is not in a much better condition. The 
natural taste for those employments makes more people follow 
them than can live comfortably by them, and the produce of their 
labour, in proportion to its quantity, comes always too cheap to 
market to afford anything but the most scanty subsistence to the 
labourers. 

Disagreeableness and disgrace affect the profits of stock in the 
same manner as the wages of labour. The keeper of an inn or tav- 
ern, who is never master of his own house, and who is exposed to 
the brutality of every drunkard, exercises neither a very agreeable 
nor a very creditable business. But there is scarce any common 
trade in which a small stock yields so great a profit. 

Secondly, The wages of labour vary with the easiness and cheap- 
ness, or the difficulty and expence of learning the business. 

"W^en any expensive machine is erected, the extraordinary work 
to be performed by it before it is worn out, it must be expected, will 
replace the capital laid out upon it, with at least the ^ ordinary 
profits. A man educated at the expence of much labour and time to 
any of those employments which require extraordinary dexterity 
and skill, may be compared to one of those expensive machines. 
The work which he learns to perform, it must be expected, over and 
above the usual wages of common labour, will replace to him the 
whole expence of his education, with at least the ordinary profits 
of an equally valuable capital. It must do this too in a reasonable 
time, regard being had to the very uncertain duration of human 
life, in the same manner as to the more certain duration of the ma- 
chine. 

The difference between the wages of skilled labour and those of 
common labour, is founded upon this principle. 

The policy of Europe considers the labour of all mechanics, arti- 
ficers, and manufacturers, as skilled labour; and that of all country 
labourers as common labour. It seems to suppose that of the former 
to be of a more nice and delicate nature than that of the latter. It is 
so perhaps in some cases; but in the greater part it is quite other- 

® See Idyllium xxi. This merely describes the life of two poor fishermen, 
The note appears first in ed. 2 . 

^ Ed. I reads “its.” 


ments are 
exceeding- 
ly ill paid. 


The same 
thing is 
true of 
profits. 


(2) Wages 
vary with 
the cost of 
learning 
the busi- 
ness. 


The cost 
of ap- 
prentice- 
ship ac- 
counts for 
the wages 
of manu- 



facturers 
being 
higher 
than those 
of coun- 
try la- 
bourers 


Education 
for liberal 
profes- 
sion'^ is 
more cost- 


102 the wealth of nations 

wise, as I shall endeavour to shew by and by.® The laws and cus- 
toms of Europe, therefore, in order to qualify any person for exer- 
cising the one species of labour, impose the necessity of an appren- 
ticeship, though with different degrees of rigour in different places. 
They leave the other free and open to every body. During the con- 
tinuance of the apprenticeship, the whole labour of the apprentice 
belongs to his master. In the mean time he must, in many cases, be 
maintained by his parents or relations, and in almost all cases must 
be cloathed by them. Some money too is commonly given to the 
master for teaching him his trade. They who cannot give money, 
give time, or become bound for more than the usual number of 
years; a consideration which, though it is not always advantageous 
to the master, on account of the usual idleness of apprentices, is al- 
ways disadvantageous to the apprentice. In country labour, on the 
contrary, the labourer, while he is employed about the easier, learns 
the more difficult parts of his business, and his own labour maintains 
him through all the different stages of his employment. It is reason- 
able, therefore, that in Europe the wages of mechanics, artificers, 
and manufacturers, should be somewhat higher than those of com- 
mon labourers.^ They are so accordingly, and their superior gains 
make them in most places be considered as a superior rank of 
people. This superiority, however, is generally very small; the 
daily or weekly earnings of journeymen in the more common sorts 
of manufactures, such as those of plain linen and woollen cloth, 
computed at an average, are, in most places, very little more than 
the day wages of common labourers. Their employment, indeed, is 
more steady and uniform, and the superiority of their earnings, 
taking the whole year together, may be somewhat greater. It seems 
evidently, however, to be no greater than what is sufficient to com- 
pensate the superior expence of their education. 

Education in the ingenious arts and in the liberal professions, is 
still more tedious and expensive. The pecuniary recompence, there- 
fore, of painters and sculptors, of lawyers and physicians, ought 
to be much more liberal: and it is so accordingly. 

® Below, p. 126. 

This argument seems to be modelled closely on Cantillon, Essai, pp. 23, 
24, but probably also owes something to Mandeville, Fable of the Bees, pt. 
ii., dialogue vi., vol. ii., p. 423. Cp. Lectures, pp. 173-175. 

^®The “ought” is equivalent to “it is reasonable they should be” in the 
previous paragraph, and to ‘‘must” in “must not only maintain him while he 
is idle” on p. 103. Cp, “doivent” in Cantillon, Essai, p. 24: “Ceux done qui 
emploient des artisans ou gens de metier, doivent necessairement payer leur 
travail plus haut que celui d’un laboureur ou manoeuvre.” The meaning need 
not be that it is ethically right that a person on whose education much has 
been spent should receive a large reward, but only that it is economically 
desirable, since otherwise there would be a deficiency of such persons. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

The profits of stock seem to be very little affected by the easiness ly and the 
or difficulty of learning the trade in which it is employed. All the 
different ways in which stock is commonly employed in great towns pense 
seem, in reality, to be almost equally easy and equally difficult to 
learn. One branch either of foreign or domestic trade, cannot well highe/ 

be a much more intricate business than another. Profits are 

Thirdly, The wages of labour in different occupations vary with 
the constancy or inconstancy of emplo5mient.i^ by this 

Employment is much more constant in some trades than in drcum- 
others. In the greater part of manufactures, a journeyman may be 
pretty sure of employment almost every day in the year that he is wages 
able to work. A mason or bricklayer, on the contrary, can work va^with 

neither in hard frost nor in foul weather, and his employment at all constancy 
other times depends upon the occasional calls of his customers. He 
is liable, in consequence, to be frequently without any. What he 
earns, therefore, while he is employed, must not only maintain him 
while he is idle, but make him some compensation for those anxious 
and desponding moments which the thought of so precarious a situ- 
ation must sometimes occasion. Where the computed earnings of 
the greater part of manufacturers, accordingly, are nearly upon a 
level with the day wages of common labourers, those of masons and 
bricklayers are generally from one half more to double those wages. 

Where common labourers earn four and five shillings a week, ma- 
sons and bricklayers frequently earn seven and eight; where the 
former earn six, the latter often earn nine and ten, and where the 
fromer earn nine and ten, as in London, the latter commonly earn 
fifteen and eighteen. No species of skilled labour, however, seems 
more easy to learn than that of masons and bricklayers. Chairmen 
in London, during the summer season, are said sometimes to be em- 
ployed as bricklayers. The high wages of those workmen, therefore, 
are not so much the recompence of their skill, as the compensation 
for the inconstancy of their emplo3mient. 

A house carpenter seems to exercise rather a nicer and more in- 
genious trade than a mason. In most places, however, for it is not 
universally so, his day-wages are somewhat lower. His employ- 
ment, though it depends much, does not depend so entirely upon 


^ The treatment of this head would have been clearer if it had begun with 
a distinction between “day-wages” (mentioned lower down on the page) 
and annual earnings. The first paragraph of the argument claims that an- 
nual earnings as well as day-wages will be higher in the inconstant employ- 
ment so as to counterbalance the disadvantage or repulsive force of having 
“anxious and desponding moments.” In the subsequent paragraphs, how- 
ever, this claim is lost sight of, and the discussion proceeds as if the thesis 
was that annual earnings are equal though day-wages may be unequal. 



104 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the occasional calls of his customers; and it is not liable to be in- 
terrupted by the weather. 

When the trades which generally afford constant employment, 
happen in a particular place not to do so, the wages of the work- 
men always rise a good deal above their ordinary proportion to 
those of common labour. In London almost all journeymen artifi- 
cers are liable to be called upon and dismissed by their masters 
from day to day, and from week to week, in the same manner as 
day-labourers in other places. The lowest order of artificers, jour- 
neymen taylors, accordingly, earn their half a crown a day,^^ 
though eighteen pence may be reckoned the wages of common la- 
bour. In small towns and country villages, the wages of journey- 
men taylors frequently scarce equal those of common labour; but 
in London they are often many weeks without employment, par- 
ticularly during the summer. 

When the inconstancy of employment is combined with the 
hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work, it sometimes 
raises the wages of the most common labour above those of the 
most skilful artificers. A collier working by the piece is supposed, at 
Newcastle, to earn commonly about double, and in many parts of 
Scotland about three times the wages of common labour. His high 
wages arise altogether from the hardship, disagreeableness, and 
dirtiness of his work. His employment may, upon most occasions, 
be as constant as he pleases. The coal-heavers in London exercise a 
trade which in hardship, dirtiness, and disagreeableness, almost 
equals that of colliers; and from the unavoidable irregularity in the 
arrivals of coal-ships, the employment of the greater part of them 
is necessarily very inconstant. If colliers, therefore, commonly earn 
double and triple the wages of common labour, it ought not to seem 
unreasonable that coal-heavers should sometimes earn four and 
five times those wages. In the enquiry made into their condition a 
few years ago, it was found that at the rate at which they were then 
paid, they could earn from six to ten shillings a day. Six shillings 
are about four times the wages of common labour in London, and in 
every particular trade, the lowest common earnings may always be 
considered as those of the far greater number. How extravagant so- 
ever those earnings may appear, if they were more than sufficient 
to compensate all the disagreeable circumstances of the business, 
there would soon be so great a number of competitors as, in a trade 
which has no exclusive privilege, would quickly reduce them to a 
lower rate. 


Below, p. 141, 142. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

The constancy or inconstancy of employment cannot affect 
the ordinary profits of stock in any particular trade. Whether the 
stock is or is not constantly employed depends, not upon the trade, 
but the trader.^^ 

Fourthly, The wages of labour vary according to the small or 
great trust which must be reposed in the workmen.^^ 

The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are every-where superior 
to those of many other workmen, not only of equal, but of much 
superior ingenuity; on account of the precious materials with which 
they are intrusted. 

We trust our health to the physician; our fortune and sometimes 
our life and reputation to the lawyer and attorney. Such confidence 
could not safely be reposed in people of a very mean or low condi- 
tion. Their reward must be such, therefore, as may give them that 
rank in the society which so important a trust requires. The long 
time and the great expence which must be laid out in their educa- 
tion, when combined with this circumstance, necessarily enhance 
still further the price of their labour. 

When a person employs only his own stock in trade, there is no 
trust; and the credit which he may get from other people, depends, 
not upon the nature of his trade, but upon their opinion of ids for- 
tune, probity, and prudence. The different rates of profit, therefore, 
in the different branches of trade, cannot arise from the different 
degrees of trust reposed in the traders.^® 


“Misprinted “effect” in ed. 5. 

“ That “stock” consists of actual objects seems to be overlooked here. The 
constancy with which such objects can be employed is various* the con- 
stancy with which the hearse of a village is employed depends on the num- 
ber of deaths, which may be said to be “the trade,” and is certainly not “the 
trader ” There is no difference of profits corresponding to differences of day- 
wages due to unequal constancy of employment, for the simple reason that 
“profits” are calculated by their amount per annum, but the rural under- 
taker, liable to long interruption of business in healthy seasons, may just as 
well as the bricklayer be supposed to receive “some compensation for those 
anxious and desponding moments which the thought of so precarious a situ- 
ation must sometimes occasion ” 

“ The argument foreshadowed in the introductory paragraphs of the chap- 
ter requires an allegation that it is a disadvantage to a person to have trust 
reposed in him, but no such allegation is made Cantillon, Essai, p. 27, says: 
“lorsqu’il faut de la capacity et de la confiance, on paie encore le travail plus 
cher, comme aux jouailliers, teneurs de compte, caissiers, et autres ” Hume, 
History, ed. of 1773, vol. viii., p 323, says* “It is a familiar rule in all busi- 
ness that every man should be paid in proportion to the trust reposed in him 
and the power which he enjoys.” 

“ But some trades, e.g , that of a banker, may be necessarily confined to 
persons of more than average trustworthiness, and this may raise the rate of 
profit above the ordinary level if such persons are not sufficiently plentiful. 


Con- 
stancy 
does not 
affect pro- 
fits. 

(4) Wages 
vary with 
the trust 
to be re- 
posed. 


Profits are 
unaffected 
by trust. 



( 5 ) Wages 
vary with 
the pro- 
bability of 
success. 


Law and 
similar 
profes- 
sions are 
neverthe- 
less 

crowded. 


io6 the wealth of NATIONS 

Fifthly, The wages of labour in different employments vary ac- 
cording to the probability or improbability of success in them.^'^ 

The probability that any particular person shall ever be qualified 
for the employment to which he is educated, is very different in dif- 
ferent occupations. In the greater part of mechanic trades, success 
is almost certain; but very uncertain in the liberal professions. Put 
your son apprentice to a shoemaker, there is little doubt of his 
learning to make a pair of shoes: But send him to study the law, it 
is at least twenty to one if ever he makes such proficiency as will en- 
able him to live by the business. In a perfectly fair lottery, those 
who draw the prizes ought to gain all that is lost by those who draw 
the blanks. In a profession where twenty fail for one that succeeds, 
that one ought to gain all that should have been gained by the un- 
successful twenty. The counsellor at law who, perhaps, at near forty 
years of age, begins to make something by his profession, ought to 
receive the retribution, not only of his own so tedious and expensive 
education, but of that of more than twenty others who are never 
likely to make any thing by it. How extravagant soever the fees of 
counsellors at law may sometimes appear, their real retribution is 
never equal to this.^"^ Compute in any particular place, what is like- 
ly to be annually gained, and what is likely to be annually spent, by 
all the different workmen in any common trade, such as that of 
shoemakers or weavers, and you will find that the former sum will 
generally exceed the latter. But make the same computation with 
regard to all the counsellors and students of law, in all the different 
inns of court, and you will find that their annual gains bear but a 
very small proportion to their annual expence, even though you rate 
the former as high, and the latter as low, as can well be done. The 
lottery of the law, therefore, is very far from being a perfectly fair 
lottery; and that, as well as many other liberal and honourable pro- 
fessions, is,^® in point of pecuniary gain, evidently under-recom- 
penced. 

Those professions keep their level, however, with other occupa- 
tions, and, notwithstanding these discouragements, all the most 
generous and liberal spirits are eager to crowd into them. Two dif- 
ferent causes contribute to recommend them. First, the desire of the 
reputation which attends upon superior excellence in any of them; 

The argument under this head, which is often misunderstood, is that pe- 
cuniary wages are (on the average, setting great gains against small ones) 
less in trades where there aie high prizes and many blanks. The remote pos- 
sibility of obtaining one of the high prizes is one of the circumstances which 
“in the imaginations of men make up for a small pecuniary gain” (p. 99). 
Cantillon, Essai, p. 24, is not so subtle, merely making remuneration pro- 
portionate to ri^. 

^Lectures, p. 175. ^'^Eds. 1-4 read “are.” 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

and, secondly, the natural confidence which every man has more or 
less, not only in his own abilities, but in his own good fortune. 

To excel in any profession, in which but few arrive at mediocrity, 
is the most decisive mark of what is called genius or superior tal- 
ents. The public admiration which attends upon such distinguished 
abilities, makes always a part of their reward; a greater or smaller 
in proportion as it is higher or lower in degree. It makes a consider- 
able part of that reward in the profession of physic; a still great- 
er perhaps in that of law; in poetry and philosophy it makes almost 
the whole. 

There are some very agreeable and beautiful talents of which the 
possession commands a certain sort of admiration; but of which the 
exercise for the sake of gain is considered, whether from reason or 
prejudice, as a sort of public prostitution. The pecuniary recom- 
pence, therefore, of those who exercise them in this manner, must be 
sufficient, not only to pay for the time, labour, and expence of ac- 
quiring the talents, but for the discredit which attends the employ- 
ment of them as the means of subsistence. The exorbitant rewards 
of players, opera-singers, opera-dancers, &c. are founded upon those 
two principles; the rarity and beauty of the talents, and the dis- 
credit of employing them in this manner. It seems absurd at first 
sight tliat we should despise their persons, and yet reward their tal- 
ents with the most profuse liberality. While we do the one, however, 
we must of necessity do the other. Should the public opinion or pre- 
judice ever alter with regard to such occupations, their pecuniary 
recompence would quickly diminish. More people would apply to 
them, and the competition would quickly reduce the price of their 
labour. Such talents, though far from being common, are by no 
means so rare as is imagined. Many people possess them in great 
perfection, who disdain to make this use of them; and many more 
are capable of acquiring them, if any thing could be made honour- 
ably by them. 

The over-weening conceit which the greater part of men have of 
their own abilities, is an ancient evil remarked by the philosophers 
and moralists of all ages. Their absurd presumption in their own 
good fortune, has been less taken notice of. It is, however, if pos- 
sible, still more universal. There is no man living who, when in tol- 
erable health and spirits, has not some share of it. The chance of 
gain is by every man more or less over-valued, and the chance of 
loss is by most men under-valued, and by scarce any man, who is in 
tolerable health and spirits, valued more than it is worth, 


Public ad- 
miration 
makes a 
part of 
the re- 
ward of 
superior 
abilities. 


except in 
the pecu- 
liar case 
of players, 
opera- 
singers, 

&c. 


The 
greater 
part of 
men have 
an over- 
weening 
conceit of 
their abi- 
lities: 


^Ed. I reads “of it.’ 



lotteries 
show that 
the 

chance of 
gain is 
over- 
valued. 


and the 
moderate 
profit of 
insurers 
shows 
that the 
chance of 
loss is 
under- 
valued. 


io8 the wealth of NATIONS 

That the chance of gain is naturally over-valued, we may learn 
from the universal success of lotteries. The world neither ever saw, 
nor ever will see, a perfectly fair lottery; or one in which the whole 
gain compensated the whole loss; because the undertaker could 
make nothing by it. In the state lotteries the tickets are really not 
worth the price which is paid by the original subscribers, and yet 
commonly sell in the market for twenty, thirty, and sometimes forty 
per cent, advance. The vain hope of gaining some of the great prizes 
is the sole cause of this demand. The soberest people scarce look 
upon it as a folly to pay a small sum for the chance of gaining ten 
or twenty thousand pounds; though they know that even that small 
sum is perhaps twenty or thirty per cent, more than the chance is 
worth. In a lottery in which no prize exceeded twenty pounds, 
though in other respects it approached much nearer to a perfectly 
fair one than the common state lotteries, there would not be the 
same demand for tickets. In order to have a better chance for some 
of the great prizes, some people purchase several tickets, and oth- 
ers, small shares in a still greater number. There is not, however, a 
more certain proposition in mathematics, than that the more tickets 
you adventure upon, the more likely you are to be a loser. Adven- 
ture upon all the tickets in the lottery, and you lose for certain ; and 
the greater the number of your tickets the nearer you approach to 
this certainty. 

That the chance of loss is frequently undervalued, and scarce 
ever valued more than it is worth, we may learn from the very mod- 
erate profit of insurers. In order to make insurance, either from fire 
or sea-risk, a trade at all, the common premium must be sufficient 
to compensate the common losses, to pay the expence of manage- 
ment, and to afford such a profit as might have been drawn from an 
equal capital employed in any common trade. The person who pays 
no more than this, evidently pays no more than the real value of the 
risk, or the lowest price at which he can reasonably expect to insure 
it. But though many people have made a little money by insurance, 
very few have made a great fortune; and from this consideration 
alone, it seems evident enough, that the ordinary balance of profit 
and loss is not more advantageous in this, than in other common 
trades by which so many people make fortunes. Moderate, how- 
ever, as the premium of insurance commonly is, many people de- 
spise the risk too much to care to pay it. Taking the whole kingdom 
at an average, nineteen houses in twenty, or rather, perhaps, ninety- 
nine in a hundred, are not insured from fire. Sea risk is more alarm- 
ing to the greater part of people, and the proportion of ships insured 
to those not insured is much greater. Many sail, however, at all sea- 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^^9 

sons, and even in time of war, without any insurance. This may 
sometimes perhaps be done without any imprudence. When a great 
company, or even a great merchant, has twenty or thirty ships at 
sea, they may, as it were, insure one another. The premium saved 
upon them all, may more than compensate such losses as they are 
likely to meet with in the common course of chances. The neglect of 
insurance upon shipping, however, in the same manner as upon 
houses, is, in most cases, the effect of no such nice calculation, but 
of mere thoughtless rashness and presumptuous contempt of the 
risk. 

The contempt of risk and the presumptuous hope of success, are 
in no period of life more active than at the age at which young peo- 
ple chuse their professions. How little the fear of misfortune is then 
capable of balancing the hope of good luck, appears still more evi- 
dently in the readiness of the common people to enlist as soldiers, 
or to go to sea, than in the eagerness of those of better fashion to 
enter into what are called the liberal professions. 

What a common soldier may lose is obvious enough. Without re- 
garding the danger, however, young volunteers never enlist so read- 
ily as at the beginning of a new war; and though they have scarce 
any chance of preferment, they figure to themselves, in their youth- 
ful fancies, a thousand occasions of acquiring honour and distinc- 
tion which never occur. These romantic hopes make the whole price 
of their blood. Their pay is less than that of common labourers, and 
in actual service their fatigues are much greater. 

The lottery of the sea is not altogether so disadvantageous as 
that of the army. The son of a creditable labourer or artificer may 
frequently go to sea with his father’s consent; but if he enlists as a 
soldier, it is always without it. Other people see some chance of his 
making something by the one trade: nobody but himself sees any 
of his making any thing by the other. The great admiral is less the 
object of public admiration than the great general, and the highest 
success in the sea service promises a less brilliant fortune and repu- 
tation than equal success in the land. The same difference runs 
through all the inferior degrees of preferment in both. By the rules 
of precedency a captain in the navy ranks with a colonel in the 
army: but he does not rank with him in the common estimation. As 
the great prizes in the lottery are less, the smaller ones must be 
more numerous. Common sailors, therefore, more frequently get 
some fortune and preferment than common soldiers; and the hope 
of those prizes is what principally recommends the trade. Though 
their skill and dexterity are much superior to that of almost any 
artificers, and though their whole life is one continual scene of 


Young 
people are 
particu- 
larly 
prone to 
over- 
value the 
chance of 
gain and 
under- 
value the 
risk of 
loss. 

For this 
reason 
soldiers 
are poorly 
paid, 

and sail- 
ors not 
much 
better. 



Dangers 
which can 
be sur- 
mounted 
attract, 
though 
mere un- 
whole- 
semeness 
repels. 


Profits ' 
vary with 


IIO the wealth of nations 

hardship and danger, yet for all this dexterity and skill, for al 
those hardships and dangers, while they remain in the condition of 
common sailors, they receive scarce any other recompence but the 
pleasure of exercising the one and of surmounting the other. Their 
wages are not greater than those of common labourers at the port 
which regulates the rate of seamen^s wages. As they are continually 
going from port to port, the monthly pay of those who sail from all 
the different ports of Great Britain, is more nearly upon a level 
than that of any other workmen in those different places; and the 
rate of the port to and from which the greatest number sail, that is 
the port of London, regulates that of all the rest. At London the 
wages of the greater part of the different classes of workmen are 
about double those of the same classes at Edinburgh. But the sail 
ors who sail from the port of London seldom earn above three or 
four shillings a month more than those who sail from the port of 
Leith, and the difference is frequently not so great. In time of 
peace, and in the merchant service, the London price is from a 
guinea to about seven-and-twenty shillings the calendar month. A 
common labourer in London, at the rate of nine or ten shillings a 
week, may earn in the calendar month from forty to five-and-forty 
shillings. The sailor, indeed, over and above his pay, is supplied 
with provisions. Their value, however, may not perhaps always ex- 
ceed the difference between his pay and that of the common labour- 
er; and though it sometimes should, the excess will not be clear 
gain to the sailor, because he cannot share it with his wife and fam- 
ily, whom he must maintain out of his wages at home. 

The dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a life of adventures, in- 
stead of disheartening young people, seem frequently to recom- 
mend a trade to them. A tender mother, among the inferior ranks 
of people, is often afraid to send her son to school at a sea-port 
town, lest the sight of the ships and the conversation and adven- 
tures of the sailors should entice him to go to sea. The distant pros- 
pect of hazards, from which we can hope to extricate ourselves by 
courage and address, is not disagreeable to us, and does not raise 
the wages of labour in any employment. It is otherwise with those 
in which courage and address can be of no avail. In trades which 
are known to be very unwholesome, the wages of labour are always 
remarkably high. Unwholesomeness is a species of disagreeable- 
ness, and its effects upon the wages of labour are to be ranked un- 
der that general head. 

In all the different employments of stock, the ordinary rate of 
profit varies more or less with the certainty or uncertainty of the 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

returns. These are in general less uncertain in the inland than in 
the foreign trade, and in some branches of foreign trade than in 
others; in the trade to North America, for example, than in that to 
Jamaica. The ordinary rate of profit always rises more or less with 
the risk. It does not, however, seem to rise in proportion to it, or so 
as to compensate it completely. Bankruptcies are most frequent in 
the most hazardous trades. The most hazardous of all trades, that 
of a smuggler, though when the adventure succeeds it is likewise 
the most profitable, is the infallible road to bankruptcy. The pre- 
sumptuous hope of success seems to act here as upon all other occa- 
sions, and to entice so many adventurers into those hazardous 
trades, that their competition reduces the profit below what is 
sufficient to compensate the risk. To compensate it completely, the 
common returns ought, over and above the ordinary profits of 
stock, not only to make up for all occasional losses, but to afford a 
surplus profit to the adventurers of the same nature with the profit 
of insurers. But if the common returns were sufficient for all this, 
bankruptcies would not be more frequent in these than in other 
tiades.^^ 

Of the five circumstances, therefore, which vary the wages of la- 
bour, two only affect the profits of stock; the agreeableness or dis- 
agreeableness of the business, and the risk or security with which 
it is attended. In point of agreeableness or disagreeableness, there 
is little or no difference in the far greater part of the different em- 
ployments of stock; but a great deal in those of labour; and the or- 
dinary profit of stock, though it rises with the risk, does not always 
seem to rise in proportion to it. It should follow from all this, that, 
in the same society or neighbourhood, the average and ordinary 
rates of profit in the different employments of stock should be more 
nearly upon a level than the pecuniary wages of the different sorts 
of labour. They are so accordingly. The difference between the 
earnings of a common labourer and those of a well employed law- 
yer or physician, is evidently much greater than that between the 
ordinary profits in any two different branches of trade. The appar- 
ent difference, besides, in the profits of different trades, is generally 
a deception arising from our not always distinguishing what ought 
to be considered as wages, from what ought to be considered as 
profit.^® 

^ Eds. 4 and 5 read “their,” doubtless a misprint 

The fact is overlooked that the numerous bankruptcies may be counter- 
balanced by the instances of great gain. Below, on p. 125, the converse mis- 
take is made of comparing great successes and leaving out of account great 
failures. 

^ Above, p. 53. 


certainty 
of return. 


Profits are 
less un- 
equal than 
wages, 
and their 
inequality 
is often 
only due 
to the in- 
cluaon of 
wages, 



as in the 
case of 
the profit 
of an apo- 
thecary, 


or coun- 
try grocer 


The great- 
er diSer- 
ence be- 
tween re- 
tail and 
wholesale 
profits in 
town than 


II2 XHE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

Apothecaries profit is become a bye-word, denoting something 
uncommonly extravagant. This great apparent profit, however, is 
frequently no more than the reasonable wages of labour. The skill 
of an apothecary is a much nicer and more delicate matter than 
that of any artificer whatever; and the trust which is reposed in 
him is of much greater importance. He is the physician of the poor 
in all cases, and of the rich when the distress or danger is not very 
great. His reward, therefore, ought to be suitable to his skill and 
his trust, and it arises generally from the price at which he sells his 
drugs. But the whole drugs which the best employed apothecary, in 
a large market town, will sell in a year, may not perhaps cost him 
above thirty or forty pounds. Though he should sell them, there- 
fore, for three or four hundred, or at a thousand per cent, profit, 
this may frequently be no more than the reasonable wages of his 
labour charged, in the only way in which he can charge them, upon 
the price of his drugs. The greater part of the apparent profit is 
real wages disguised in the garb of profit. 

In a small sea-port town,^^ a little grocer will make forty or fifty 
per cent, upon a stock of a single hundred pounds, while a consid- 
erable wholesale merchant in the same place will scarce make eight 
or ten per cent, upon a stock of ten thousand. The trade of the gro- 
cer may be necessary for the conveniency of the inhabitants, and 
the narrowness of the market may not admit the employment of a 
larger capital in the business. The man, however, must not only 
live by his trade, but live by it suitably to the qualifications which 
it requires. Besides possessing a little capital, he must be able to 
read, write, and account, and must be a tolerable judge too of, per- 
haps, fifty or sixty different sorts of goods, their prices, qualities, 
and the markets where they are to be had cheapest. He must have 
all the knowledge, in short, that is necessary for a great merchant, 
which nothing hinders him from becoming but the want of a suffi- 
cient capital. Thirty or forty pounds a year cannot be considered as 
too great a recompence for the labour of a person so accomplished. 
Deduct this from the seemingly great profits of his capital, and little 
more will remain, perhaps, than the ordinary profits of stock. The 
greater part of the apparent profit is, in this case too, real wages. 

The difference between the apparent profit of the retail and that 
of the wholesale trade, is much less in the capital than in small 
towns and country villages. Where ten thousand pounds can be em- 
ployed in the grocery trade, the wages of the grocer’s labour make 
but a very trifling addition to the real profits of so great a stock. 
The apparent profits of the wealthy retailer, therefore, are there 
Doubtless Kirkcaldy was in Smith’s mind 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^^3 

more nearly upon a level with those of the wholesale merchant. It is 
upon this account that goods sold by retail are generally as cheap 
and frequently much cheaper in the capital than in small towns and 
country villages.^^ Grocery goods, for example, are generally much 
cheaper; bread and butcher’s meat frequently as cheap. It costs no 
more to bring grocery goods to the great town than to the country 
village; but it costs a great deal more to bring corn and cattle, as 
the greater part of them must be brought from a much greater dis- 
tance, The prime cost of grocery goods, therefore, being the same 
in both places, they are cheapest where the least profit is charged 
upon them. The prime cost of bread and butcher’s meat is greater 
in the great town than in the country village; and though the profit 
is less, therefore they are not always cheaper there, but often equal- 
ly cheap. In such articles as bread and butcher’s meat, the same 
cause, which diminishes apparent profit, increases prime cost. The 
extent of the market, by giving emplo3rment to greater stocks, dim- 
inishes apparent profit; but by requiring supplies from a greater 
distance, it increases prime cost. This diminution of the one and in- 
crease of the other seem, in most cases, nearly to counter-balance 
one another; which is probably the reason that, though the prices 
of corn and cattle are commonly very different in different parts of 
the kingdom, those of bread and butcher’s meat are generally very 
nearly the same through the greater part of it. 

Though the profits of stock both in the wholesale and retail trade 
are generally less in the capital than in small towns and country 
villages, yet great fortunes are frequently acquired from small be- 
ginnings in the former, and scarce ever in the latter. In small towns 
and country villages, on account of the narrowness of the market, 
trade cannot always be extended as stock extends. In such places, 
therefore, though the rate of a particular person’s profits may be 
very high, the sum or amount of them can never be very great, nor 
consequently that of his annual accumulation. In great towns, on 
the contrary, trade can be extended as stock increases, and the 
credit of a frugal and thriving man increases much faster than his 
stock. His trade is extended in proportion to the amount of both, 
and the sum or amount of his profits is in proportion to the extent 
of his trade, and his annual accumulation in proportion to the 
amount of his profits. It seldom happens, however, that great for- 
tunes are made even in great towns by any one regular, estab- 
lished, and well-known branch of business, but in consequence of a 
long life of industry, frugality, and attention. Sudden fortunes, in- 
deed, are sometimes made in such places by what is called the trade 

“ Above, p. 75. 


countiyis 
due to the 
same 
cause 


The lesser 
rate of 
profit in 
towns 
yields 
larger for- 
tunes, but 
these 
mostly 
arise from 
specula 
tion. 



The five 
:ircum- 
stances 
thus 
counter- 
balance 
difference 
of pecuni- 
ary gains, 

but three 
things are 
necessary 
as well as 
perfect 
freedom: 

(i) the 
employ- 
ments 
must be 
well 
known 
and long 
Estab- 
lished, 

since new 

trades 

yield 

higher 

wages, 


IH THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

of speculation. The speculative merchant exercises no one regular, 
established, or well known branch of business. He is a corn mer- 
chant this year, and a wine merchant the next, and a sugar, tobac- 
co, or tea merchant the year after. He enters into every trade when 
he foresees that it is likely to be more than commonly profitable, 
and he quits it when he foresees that its profits are likely to return 
to the level of other trades. His profits and losses, therefore, can 
bear no regular proportion to those of any one established and well- 
known branch of business. A bold adventurer may sometimes ac- 
quire a considerable fortune by two or three successful specula- 
tions; but is just as likely to lose one by two or three unsuccessful 
ones. This trade can be carried on no where but in great towns. It is 
only in places of the most extensive commerce and correspondence 
that the intelligence requisite for it can be had. 

The five circumstances above mentioned, though they occasion 
considerable inequalities in the wages of labour and profits of stock, 
occasion none in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages, 
real or imaginary, of the different employments of either. The na- 
ture of those circumstances is such, that they make up for a small 
pecuniary gain in some, and counter-balance a great one in others. 

In order, however, that this equality may take place in the whole 
of their advantages or disadvantages, three things are requisite 
even where there is the most perfect freedom. First, the employ- 
ments must be well known and long established in the neighbour- 
hood; secondly, they must be in their ordinary, or what may be 
called their natural state; and, thirdly, they must be the sole or 
principal employments of those who occupy them. 

First, this equality can take place only in those employments 
which are well known, and have been long established in the neigh- 
bourhood. 

Where all other circumstances are equal, wages are generally 
higher in new than in old trades. When a projector attempts to es- 
tablish a new manufacture, he must at first entice his workmen 
from other employments by higher wages than they can either earn 
in their own trades, or than the nature of his work would otherwise 
require, and a considerable time must pass away before he can ven- 
ture to reduce them to the common level. Manufactures for which 
the demand arises altogether from fashion and fancy, are continu- 
ally changing, and seldom last long enough to be considered as old 
established manufactures. Those, on the contrary, for which the de- 
mand arises chiefly from use or necessity, are less liable to change, 
and the same form or fabric may continue in demand for whole 
centuries together. The wages of labour, therefore, are likely to be 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

higher in manufactures of the former, than in those of the latter 
kind. Birmingham deals chiefly in manufactures of the former 
kind; Sheffield in those of the latter; and the wages of labour in 
those two different places, are said to be suitable to this difference 
in the nature of their manufactures. 

The establishment of any new manufacture, of any new branch 
of commerce, or of any new practice in agriculture, is always a 
speculation, from which the projector promises himself extraordi- 
nary profits. These profits sometimes are very great, and some- 
times, more frequently, perhaps, they are quite otherwise; but in 
general they bear no regular proportion to those of other old trades 
in the neighbourhood. If the project succeeds, they are commonly 
at first very high. When the trade or practice becomes thoroughly 
established and well known, the competition reduces them to the 
level of other trades. 

Secondly, This equality in the whole of the advantages and dis- 
advantages of the different employments of labour and stock, can 
take place only in the ordinary, or what may be called the natural 
state of those employments. 

The demand for almost every different species of labour is some- 
times greater and sometimes less than usual. In the one case the ad- 
vantages of the employment rise above, in the other they fall below 
the common level. The demand for country labour is greater at hay- 
time and harvest, than during the greater part of the year; and 
wages rise with the demand. In time of war, when forty or fifty 
thousand sailors are forced from the merchant service into that of 
the king, the demand for sailors to merchant ships necessarily rises 
with their scarcity, and their wages upon such occasions commonly 
rise from a guinea and seven-and-twenty shillings, to forty shillings 
and three pounds a month. In a decaying manufacture, on the con- 
trary, many workmen, rather than quit their old trade, are content- 
ed with smaller wages than would otherwise be suitable to the na- 
ture of their employment. 

The profits of stock vary with the price of the commodities in 
which it is employed. As the price of any commodity rises above 
the ordinary or average rate, the profits of at least some part of 
the stock that is employed in bringing it to market, rise above their 
proper level, and as it falls they sink below it. All commodities are 
more or less liable to variations of price, but some are much more 
so than others. In all commodities which are produced by human 
industry, the quantity of industry annually employed is necessarily 
regulated by the annual demand, in such a manner that the average 
annual produce may, as nearly as possible, be equal to the average 


and high- 
er profits: 


(2) the 
employ- 
ments 
must be in 
their 
natural 
state, 

since the 
demand 
for labour 
in each 
employ- 
ment 
varies 
from time 
to time 


and pro- 
fits fluctu- 
ate with 
the price 
of the 
commod- 
ity pro- 
duced: 



and (3) 
the em- 
ployments 
must be 
the prin- 
cipal em- 
ployment 
of iose 
who oc- 
cupy 
them, 
smce 
people 
main- 
tained by 
one em- 
ployment 
will work 
cheap at 
another, 
like the 
Scotch 
cotters, 


116 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

annual consumption. In some employments, it has already been ob- 
served,-^ the same quantity of industry will always produce the 
same, or very nearly the same quantity of commodities. In the linen 
or woollen manufactures, for example, the same number of hands 
will annually work up very nearly the same quantity of linen and 
woollen cloth. The variations in the market price of such commod- 
ities, therefore, can arise only from some accidental variation in 
the demand. A public mourning raises the price of black cloth.^^ 
But as the demand for most sorts of plain linen and woollen cloth 
is pretty uniform, so is likewise the price. But there are other em- 
plo3mients in which the same quantity of industry will not always 
produce the same quantity of commodities. The same quantity of 
industry, for example, will, in different years, produce very different 
quantities of corn, wine, hops, sugar, tobacco, &c. The price of such 
commodities, therefore, varies not only with the variations of de- 
mand, but with the much greater and more frequent variations of 
quantity, and is consequently extremely fluctuating. But the profit 
of some of the dealers must necessarily fluctuate with the price of 
the commodities. The operations of the speculative merchant are 
principally employed about such commodities. He endeavours to 
buy them up when he foresees that their price is likely to rise, and 
to sell them when it is likely to fall. 

Thirdly, This equality in the whole of the advantages and disad- 
vantages of the different employments of labour and stock, can 
take place only in such as are the sole or principal employments of 
those who occupy them. 

When a person derives his subsistence from one employment, 
which does not occupy the greater part of his time; in the intervals 
of his leisure he is often willing to work at another for less wages 
than would otherwise suit the nature of the employment. 

There still subsists in many parts of Scotland a set of people 
called Cotters or Cottagers, though they were more frequent some 
years ago than they are now. They are a sort of out-servants of the 
landlords and farmers. The usual reward which they receive from 
their masters is a house, a small garden for pot herbs, as much grass 
as will feed a cow, and, perhaps, an acre or two of bad arable land. 
When their master has occasion for their labour, he gives them, be- 
sides, two pecks of oatmeal a week, worth about sixteen pence ster- 
ling. During a great part of the year he has little or no occasion for 
their labour, and the cultivation of their own little possession is not 
sufficient to occupy the time which is left at their own disposal. 
When such occupiers were more numerous than they are at pres- 

Above, p. 58. ^ The illustration has already been used above, p. 59 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^^7 

ent, they are said to have been willing to give their spare time for 
a very small recompence to any body, and to have wrought for less 
wages than other labourers. In ancient times they seem to have 
been common all over Europe. In countries ill cultivated and worse 
inhabited, the greater part of the landlords and farmers could not 
otherwise provide themselves with the extraordinary number of 
hands, which country labour requires at certain seasons. The daily 
or weekly recompence which such labourers occasionally received 
from their masters, was evidently not the whole price of their la- 
bour. Their small tenement made a considerable part of it. This 
daily or weekly recompence, however, seems to have been consid- 
ered as the whole of it, by many writers who have collected the 
prices of labour and provisions in ancient times, and who have 
taken pleasure in representing both as wonderfully low. 

The produce of such labour comes frequently cheaper to market 
than would otherwise be suitable to its nature. Stockings in many 
parts of Scotland are knit much cheaper than they can any-where 
be wrought upon the loom. They are the work of servants and la- 
bourers, who derive the principal part of their subsistence from 
some other employment. More than a thousand pair of Shetland 
stockings are annually imported into Leith, of which the price is 
from five pence to seven pence a pair. At Learwick, the small capi- 
tal of the Shetland islands, ten pence a day, I have been assured, is 
a common price of common labour. In the same islands they knit 
worsted stockings to the value of a guinea a pair and upwards. 

The spinning of linen yarn is carried on in Scotland nearly in the 
same way as the knitting of stockings, by servants who are chiefly 
hired for other purposes. They earn but a very scanty subsistence, 
who endeavour to get their whole livelihood by either of those 
trades. In most parts of Scotland she is a good spinner who can earn 
twenty pence a week. 

In opulent countries the market is generally so extensive that any 
one trade is sufficient to employ the whole labour and stock of those 
who occupy it. Instances of people’s living by one employment, and 
at the same time deriving some little advantage from another, oc- 
cur chiefly in poor countries. The following instance, however, of 
something of the same kind is to be found in the capital of a very 
rich one. There is no city in Europe, I believe, in which house-rent 
is dearer than in London, and yet I know no capital in which a fur- 
nished apartment can be hired so cheap. Lodging is not only much 
cheaper in London than in Paris ; it is much cheaper than in Edin- 
burgh of the same degree of goodness j and what may seem extraor- 
dinary, the dearness of house-rent is the cause of the cheapness of 


Shetland 

knitters, 


Scotch 
linen spin- 
ners, 


and Lon- 
don lodg- 
ing house 
keepers. 



The 

policy of 
Europe 
occasions 
more im- 
portant 
inequali- 
ties 

in three 
ways: 


(i)It 
restricts 
competi- 
tion in 


the wealth op nations 

lodging. The dearness of house-rent in London arises, not only from 
those causes which render it dear in all great capitals, the dearness 
of labour, the dearness of all the materials of building, which must 
generally be brought from a great distance, and above all the dear- 
ness of ground-rent, every landlord acting the part of a monopo- 
list, and frequently exacting a higher rent for a single acre of bad 
land in a town, that can be had for a hundred of the best in the 
country; but it arises in part from the peculiar manners and cus- 
toms of the people which oblige every master of a family to hire a 
whole house from top to bottom. A dwelling-house in England 
means every thing diat is contained under the same roof. In 
France, Scotland, and many other parts of Europe, it frequently 
means no more than a single story. A tradesman in London is ob- 
liged to hire a whole house in that part of the town where his cus- 
tomers live. His shop is upon the ground-floor, and he and his fam- 
ily sleep in the garret; and he endeavours to pay a part of his 
house-rent by letting the two middle stories to lodgers. He expects 
to maintain his family by his trade, and not by his lodgers. Where- 
as, at Paris and Edinburgh, the people who let lodgings have com- 
monly no other means of subsistence; and the price of the lodging 
must pay, not only the rent of the house, but the whole expence of 
the family. 


Part II 

Inequalities occasioned by the Policy of Europe 

Such are the inequalities in the whole of the advantages and dis- 
advantages of the different employments of labour and stock, 
which the defect of any of the three requisites above-mentioned 
must occasion, even where there is the most perfect liberty. But the 
policy of Europe, by not leaving things at perfect liberty, occasions 
other inequalities of much greater importance. 

It does this chiefly in the three following ways. First, by restrain- 
ing the competition in some employments to a smaller number than 
would otherwise be disposed to enter into them; secondly, by in- 
creasing it in others beyond what it naturally would be; and, third- 
ly, by obstructing the free circulation of labour and stock, both 
froni employment to employment and from place to place. 

First, The policy of Europe occasions a very important inequal- 
ity in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the differ- 
ent employments of labour and stock, by restraining the compel!- 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^^9 

tion in some employments to a smaller number than might other- 
wise be disposed to enter into them. 

The exclusive privileges of corporations are the principal means 
it makes use of for this purpose. 

The exclusive privilege of an incorporated trade necessarily re- 
strains the competition, in the town where it is established, to those 
who are free of the trade. To have served an apprenticeship in the 
town, under a master properly qualified, is commonly the necessary 
requisite for obtaining this freedom. The bye-laws of the corpora- 
tion regulate sometimes the number of apprentices which any mas- 
ter is allowed to have, and almost always the number of years 
which each apprentice is obliged to serve. The intention of both 
regulations is to restrain the competition to a much smaller number 
than might otherwise be disposed to enter into the trade. The limi- 
tation of the number of apprentices restrains it directly. A long 
term of apprenticeship restrains it more indirectly, but as effectu- 
ally, by increasing the expence of education. 

In Sheffield no master cutler can have more than one apprentice 
at a time, by a bye-law of the corporation. In Norfolk and Norwich 
no master weaver can have more than two apprentices, under pain 
of forfeiting five pounds a month to the king.^® No master hatter 
can have more than two apprentices any-where in England, or in 
the English plantations, under pain of forfeiting five pounds a 
month, half to the king, and half to him who shall sue in any court 
of record.^^ Both these regulations, though they have been con- 
firmed by a public law of the kingdom, are evidently dictated by 
the same corporation spirit which enacted the bye-law of Shef- 
field.^^ The silk weavers in London had scarce been incorporated a 
year when they enacted a bye-law, restraining any master from hav- 
ing more than two apprentices at a time. It required a particular act 
of parliament to rescind this bye-law.^^ 

Under 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 5, § 18. 

“^8 Eliz., c. IT, § 8; I Jac. I., c. 17, § 3 ; 5 Geo. II., c. 23 , ^ 

8 Eliz., c. II, was enacted “at the lamentable suit and complmnt 
not of the hatters but of the cap-makers, who alleged that they were being 
impoverished by the excessive use of hats, which were made of foreign wool, 
and the extension to the colonies of the restriction on apprentices by 5 
Geo. II., c. 22, was doubtless suggested by the English hatters’ jealousy of 
the American hatters, so that this regulation was not dictated by quite the 
same spirit as the Sheffield by-law. 

The preamble of 13 and 14 Car. IL, c. 15, says that the company of silk 
throwers in London were incorporated in 1629, and the preamble 01 20 
Car, IL, c. 6, says that the trade had lately been obstructed because the com- 
pany had endeavoured to put into execution a certain by-law made by them 
nearly forty years since, restricting the freemen to 160 spindles and the as- 
sistants to 240. The act 20 Car. IL, c. 6, accordingly declares this by-law 
void. It also enacts that “no by-law already made or hereafter to be made 


some em- 
ploy- 
ments, 

principal- 
ly by giv- 
ing exclu- 
sive privi- 
leges to 
corpora- 
tions, 

which re- 
quire long 
appren- 
ticeship 
and limit 
the num- 
ber of ap- 
prentices. 



120 


Seven 
years is 
the usual 
period of 
appren- 
ticeship. 


The Sta- 
tute of 
Appren- 
ticeship, 
which re- 
quired it 
every- 
where in 
England, 
has been 
confined 
to market 
towns, 


and to 
trades 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Seven years seem anciently to have been, all over Europe, the 
usual term established for the duration of apprenticeships in the 
greater part of incorporated trades. All such incorporations were 
anciently called universities; which indeed is the proper Latin name 
for any incorporation whatever. The university of smiths, the uni- 
versity of taylors, &c. are expressions which we commonly meet 
with in the old charters of ancient towns.^^ When those particular 
incorporations which are now peculiarly called universities were 
first established, the term of years which it was necessary to study, 
in order to obtain the degree of master of arts, appears evidently to 
have been copied from the term of apprenticeship in common 
trades, of which the incorporations were much more ancient. As to 
have wrought seven years under a master properly qualified, was 
necessary, in order to entitle any person to become a master, and to 
have himself apprentices in a common trade; so to have studied 
seven years under a master properly qualified, was necessary to en- 
title him to become a master, teacher, or doctor (words anciently 
S3monimous) in the liberal arts, and to have scholars or apprentices 
(words likewise originally synonimous) to study under him. 

By the sth of Elizabeth, commonly called the Statute of Ap- 
prenticeship,^^ it was enacted, that no person should for the future 
exercise any trade, craft, or mystery at that time exercised in Eng- 
land, unless he had previously served to it an apprenticeship of 
seven years at least ; and what before had been the bye-law of many 
particular corporations, became in England the general and public 
law of all trades carried on in market towns. For though the words 
of the statute are very general, and seem plainly to include the 
whole kingdom, by interpretation its operation has been limited to 
market towns, it having been held that in country villages a person 
may exercise several different trades, though he has not served a 
seven years apprenticeship to each, they being necessary for the 
conveniency of the inhabitants, and the number of people frequently 
not being sufficient to supply each with a particular set of hands.^^ 

By a strict interpretation of the words too the operation of this 


by the said company shall limit the number of apprentices to less than 
three. 

®'‘Tn Italy a mestiere or company of artisans and tradesmen was some- 
times styled an ars or miversitas The company of mercers of Rome 

are styled nmversitas mercianorum, and the company of bakers there mti- 
versitas Madox, Fima Burgi, 1726, p 32 

®C. 4, § 31. 

“It hath been held that this statute doth not restrain a man from using 
several trades, so as he had been an apprentice to aU; wherefore it indemni- 
fies all petty chapmen m httle towns and villages because their masters kept 
fte same imed todes before.”-Matthew Bacon, New Abridgement of Te 
Law, 3rd ed., 1768, vol. m,, p. JSS, t-V- Master and servant. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 121 

statute has been limited to those trades which were established in 
England before the sth of Elizabeth, and has never been extended 
to such as have been introduced since that time.^^ This limitation 
has given occasion to several distinctions which, considered as rules 
of police, appear as foolish as can well be imagined. It has been ad- 
judged, for example, that a coach-maker can neither himself make 
nor employ journeymen to make his coach-wheels; but must buy 
them of a master wheel-wright; this latter trade having been exer- 
cised in England before the sth of Elizabeth.^^^ But a wheel-wright, 
though he has never served an apprenticeship to a coach-maker, 
may either himself make or employ journeymen to make coaches; 
the trade of a coach-maker not being within the statute, because 
not exercised in England at the time when it was made.^® The 
manufactures of Manchester, Birmingham, and Wolverhampton, 
are many of them, upon this account, not within the statute; not 
having been exercised in England before the 5th of Elizabeth. 

In France, the duration of apprenticeships is different in different 
towns and in different trades. In Paris, five years is the term re- 
quired in a great number; but before any person can be qualified to 
exercise the trade as a master, he must, in many of them, serve five 
years more as a journeyman. During this latter term he is called the 
companion of his master, and the term itself is called his com- 
panionship.^® 

In Scotland there is no general law which regulates universally 
the duration of apprenticeships. The term is different in different 
corporations. Where it is long, a part of it may generally be re- 
deemed by paying a small fine. In most towns too a very small fine 
is sufficient to purchase the freedom of any corporation. The weav- 
ers of linen and hempen cloth, the principal manufactures of the 
country, as well as all other artificers subservient to them, wheel- 
makers, reel-makers, &c. may exercise their trades in any town cor- 
porate without paying any fine. In all towns corporate all persons 
are free to sell butcher’s meat upon any lawful day of the week. 
Three years is in Scotland a common term of apprenticeship, even 
in* some very nice trades; and in general I know of no country in 
Europe in which corporation laws are so little oppressive. 

The property which every man has in his own labour, as it is the 
original foundation of all other property,®® so it is the most sacred 

Ihid.i vol. iii., p. 552. lUd., vol. i , p. 553. 

“Bacon (ihid.j iii., 553), however, says (Mstinctly: “A coachmaker is 
within this statute,” on the authority of Ventria’ Reports, p. 346. 

^ Corapagnon. “ Compagnonnage. 

“ Contrast with this the account of the origin of property in the Lectures, 
pp. 107-127. 


existing 
when it 
was 
passed, 


The term 
varies in 
France, 


and Scot- 
land, 
where the 
regula- 
tions are 
less op- 
pressive. 


All such 
regula- 



tions are 
as imper- 
tinent as 
oppres- 
sive. 


Long ap- 
prentice- 
ships are 
no secur- 
ity against 
bad work, 


and do 
not form 
young 
people to 
industry. 


Appren- 
ticeships 
were un- 
known to 


122 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

and inviolable. The patrimony of a poor man lies in the strength 
and dexterity of his hands; and to hinder him from employing this 
strength and dexterity in what manner he thinks proper without in- 
jury to his neighbour, is a plain violation of this most sacred prop- 
erty. It is a manifest encroachment upon the just liberty both of 
the workman, and of those who might be disposed to employ him. 
As it hinders the one from working at what he thinks proper, so it 
hinders the others from employing whom they think proper. To 
judge whether he is fit to be employed, may surely be trusted to 
the discretion of the employers whose interest it so much concerns. 
The affected anxiety of the law-giver lest they should employ an 
improper person, is evidently as impertinent as it is oppressive. 

The institution of long apprenticeships can give no security that 
insufficient workmanship shdl not frequently be exposed to public 
sale. When this is done it is generally the effect of fraud, and not of 
inability; and the longest apprenticeship can give no security 
against fraud. Quite different regulations are necessary to prevent 
this abuse. The sterling mark upon plate, and the stamps upon 
linen and woollen cloth,^^ give the purchaser much greater secur- 
ity than any statute of apprenticeship. He generally looks at these, 
but never thinks it worth while to enquire whether the workmen had 
served a seven years apprenticeship. 

The institution of long apprenticeships has no tendency to form 
young people to industry. A journeyman who works by the piece is 
likely to be industrious, because he derives a benefit from every 
exertion of his industry. An apprentice is likely to be idle, and al- 
most always is so, because he has no immediate interest to be other- 
wise. In the inferior employments, the sweets of labour consist al- 
together in the recompence of labour. They who are soonest in a 
condition to enjoy the sweets of it, are likely soonest to conceive a 
relish for it, and to acquire the early habit of industry. A young 
man naturally conceives an aversion to labour, when for a long 
time he receives no benefit from it. The boys who are put out ap- 
prentices from public charities are generally bound for more than 
the usual number of years, and they generally turn out very idle 
and worthless. 

Apprenticeships were altogether unknown to the ancients. The 
reciprocal duties of master and apprentice make a considerable ar- 
ticle in every modern code.^^ x'he Roman law is perfectly silent with 


^“Of Scotch manufacture, lo Ann., c. 21; 13 Geo. I, c. 26. 

39 Eliz., c 20 ; 43 Eliz., c. 10, § 7. 

The article on apprentices occupies twenty-four pages in Richard Burn’s 
Jushce of the Peace, 1764. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 123 

regard to them. I know no Greek or Latin work (I might venture, I 
believe, to assert that there is none) which expresses the idea we now 
annex to the word Apprentice, a servant bound to work at a par- 
ticular trade for the benefit of a master, during a term of years, up- 
on condition that the master shall teach him that trade. 

Long apprenticeships are altogether unnecessary. The arts, which 
are much superior to common trades, such as those of making clocks 
and watches, contain no such mystery as to require a long course of 
instruction. The first invention of such beautiful machines, indeed, 
and even that of some of the instruments employed in making them, 
must, no doubt, have been the work of deep thought and long time, 
and may justly be considered as among the happiest efforts of hu- 
man ingenuity. But when both have been fairly invented and are 
well understood, to explain to any young man, in the completest 
manner, how to apply the instruments and how to construct the ma- 
chines, cannot well require more than the lessons of a few weeks: 
perhaps those of a few days might be sufficient. In the common me- 
chanic trades, those of a few days might certainly be sufficient. The 
dexterity of hand, indeed, even in common trades, cannot be ac- 
quired without much practice and experience. But a young man 
would practise with much more diligence and attention, if from the 
beginning he wrought as a journeyman, being paid in proportion to 
the little work which he could execute, and paying in his turn for 
the materials which he might sometimes spoil through awkwardness 
and inexperience. His education would generally in this way be more 
effectual, and always less tedious and expensive. The master, indeed, 
would be a loser. He would lose all the wages of the apprentice, 
which he now saves, for seven years together. In the end, perhaps, 
the apprentice himself would be a loser. In a trade so easily learnt 
he would have more competitors, and his wages, when he came to be 
a complete workman, would be much less than at present. The same 
increase of competition would reduce the profits of the masters as 
well as the wages of the workmen. The trades, the crafts, the mys- 
teries,^’"^ would all be losers. But the public would be a gainer, the 
work of all artificers coming in this way much cheaper to market. 

It is to prevent this reduction of price, and consequently of wages 
and profit, by restraining that free competition which would most 
certainly occasion it, that all corporations, and the greater part of 
corporation laws, have been established. In order to erect a cor- 

^®The last two terms seem to be used rather contemptuously. Probably 
Smith had fresh in his recollection the passage in which Madox ridicules as a 
“piece of puerility” the use of the English word “misterie derived from 
“the Gallick word mestera, mistera and misteria,” as if it “signified some- 
thing fjLvffTTipLwdes, mysterious.”— Ffma B'urgi, 1726, pp. 33 - 35 - 


the an- 
cients. 


Long ap- 
prentice- 
ships are 
altogether 
unneces- 
sary. 


Corpora- 
tions were 
estab- 
lished to 
keep up 



prices and 
conse- 
quently 
wages and 
profit; 


by means 
of which 
the towns 
gained at 
the ex- 
pense of 
the coun- 
try, 


bang en- 
abled to 
get the 
produce 
of a larg- 
er quan- 


124 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

poration, no other authority in ancient times was requisite in many 
parts of Europe, but that of the town corporate in which it was es^- 
tablished. In England, indeed, a charter from the king was likewise 
necessary. But this prerogative of the crown seems to have been re- 
served rather for extorting money from the subject, than for the de- 
fence of the common liberty against such oppressive monopolies. 
Upon paying a fine to the king, the charter seems generally to have 
been reaily granted; and when any particular class of artificers or 
traders thought proper to act as a corporation without a charter, 
such adulterine guilds, as they were called, were not always dis- 
franchised upon that account, but obliged to fine annually to the 
king for permission to exercise their usurped privileges.'^^ The im- 
mediate inspection of all corporations, and of the bye-laws which 
they might think proper to enact for their own government, be- 
longed to the town corporate in which they were established; and 
whatever discipline was exercised over them, proceeded commonly, 
not from the king, but from that greater incorporation of which 
those subordinate ones were only parts or members.'*^ 

The government of towns corporate was altogether in the hands 
of traders and artificers; and it was the manifest interest of every 
particular class of them, to prevent the market from being over- 
stocked, as they commonly express it, with their own particular 
species of industry; which is in reality to keep it always under- 
stocked. Each class was eager to establish regulations proper for this 
purpose, and, provided it was allowed to do so, was willing to con- 
sent that every other class should do the same. In consequence of 
such regulations, indeed, each class was obliged to buy the goods 
they had occasion for from every other within the town, somewhat 
dearer than they otherwise might have done. But in recompence, 
they were enabled to sell their own just as much dearer; so that so 
far it was as broad as long, as they say; and in the dealings of the 
different classes within the town with one another, none of them 
were losers by these regulations. But in their dealings with the 
country they were all great gainers; and in these latter dealings con- 
sists the whole trade which supports and enriches every town. 

Every town draws its whole subsistence, and all the materials of 
its industry, from the country. It pays for these chiefly in two ways; 
first, by sending back to die country a part of those materials 
wrought up and manufactured; in which case their price is aug- 

"See Madox Firma Burgi, p. 26, &c. This note appears first in ed. 2. 

^"“Peradventure from these secular gilds or in imitation of them sprang 
the method or practice of gildating and embodying whole towns."— Madox, 
Tirma Burgi, p. 27, 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^^5 

mented by the wages of the workmen, and the profits of their mas- 
ters or immediate employers: secondly, by sending to it a part both 
of the rude and manufactured produce, either of other countries, or 
of distant parts of the same country, imported into the town; in 
which case too the original price of those goods is augmented by the 
wages of the carriers or sailors, and by the profits of the merchants 
who employ them. In what is gained upon the first of those two 
branches of commerce, consists the advantage which the town 
makes by its manufactures; in what is gained upon the second, the 
advantage of its inland and foreign trade. The wages of the work- 
men, and the profits of their different employers, make up the whole 
of what is gained upon both. Whatever regulations, therefore, tend 
to increase those wages and profits beyond what they otherwise 
would be, tend to enable the town to purchase, with a smaller 
quantity of its labour, the produce of a greater quahtity of the la- 
bour of the country. They give the traders and artificers in the town 
an advantage over the landlords, farmers, and labourers in the 
country, and break down that natural equality which would other- 
wise take place in the commerce which is carried on between them. 
The whole annual produce of the labour of the society is annually 
divided between those two different sets of people. By means of 
those regulations a greater share of it is given to the inhabitants of 
the town than would otherwise fall to them; and a less to those of 
the country. 

The price which the town really pays for the provisions and ma- 
terials annually imported into it, is the quantity of manufactures 
and other goods annually exported from it. The dearer the latter are 
sold, the cheaper the former are bought. The industry of the town 
becomes more, and that of the country less advantageous. 

That the industry which is carried on in towns is, every-where in 
Europe, more advantageous than that which is carried on in the 
country, without entering into any very nice computations, we may 
satisfy ourselves by one very simple and obvious observation. In 
every country of Europe we find, at least, a hundred people who 
have acquired great fortunes from small beginnings by trade and 
manufactures, the industry which properly belongs to towns, for 
one who has done so by that which properly belongs to the country, 
the raising of rude produce by the improvement and cultivation of 
land. Industry, therefore, must be better rewarded, the wages of 
labour and the profits of stock must evidently be greater in the one 
situation than in the other But stock and labour naturally seek 

The argument is unsound in the absence of any proof that the more 
numerous successes are not counterbalanced by equally numerous failures; 
cp. above p. in, note. 


tity of 
country 
labour in 
exchange 
for the 
produce 
of a smal- 
ler quan- 
tity of 
their own, 


as the ex- 
ports of a 
town are 
the real 
price of 
its im- 
ports. 

That 
town in- 
dustry is 
better 
paid is 
shown by 
the large 
fortunes 
made in it 



Combina- 
tion is 
easy to 
the in- 
habitants 
of a town, 


and diffi- 
cult to 
those of 
the coun- 
try. who 
are dis- 
persed 
and not 
governed 
by the 
corpora- 
tion spirit. 
No ap- 
nrentice- 
‘^hip is 
prescribed 
for farm- 
ing, 

though a 

difficult 

art, 


126 the wealth of nations 

the most advantageous employment. They naturally, therefore, re- 
sort as much as they can to the town, and desert the country. 

The inhabitants of a town, being collected into one place, can 
easily combine together. The most insignificant trades carried on in 
towns have accordingly, in some place or other, been incorporated; 
and even where they have never been incorporated, yet the cor- 
poration spirit, the jealousy of strangers, the aversion to take ap- 
prentices, or to communicate the secret of their trade, generally 
prevail in them, and often teach them, by voluntary associations 
and agreements, to prevent that free competition which they cannot 
prohibit by bye-laws. The trades which employ but a small number 
of hands, run most easily into such combinations. Half a dozen 
wool-combers, perhaps, are necessary to keep a thousand spinners 
and weavers at work. By combining not to take apprentices they 
can not only engross the employment, but reduce the whole manu- 
facture into a sort of slavery to themselves, and raise the price of 
their labour above what is due to the nature of their work. 

The inhabitants of the country, dispersed in distant places, can- 
not easily combine together.'^’^ They have not only never been in- 
corporated, but the corporation spirit never has prevailed among 
them. No apprenticeship has ever been thought necessary to qualify 
for husbandry, the great trade of the country. After what are called 
the fine arts, and the liberal professions, however, there is perhaps 
no trade which requires so great a variety of knowledge and experi- 
ence. The innumerable volumes which have been written upon it in 
all languages, may satisfy us, that among the wisest and most 
learned nations, it has never been regarded as a matter very easily 
understood. And from all those volumes we shall in vain attempt to 
collect that knowledge of its various and complicated operations, 
which is commonly possessed even by the common farmer; how con- 
temptuously soever the very contemptible authors of some of them 
may sometimes affect to speak of him. There is scarce any common 
mechanic trade, on the contrary, of which all the operations may 
not be as completely and distinctly explained in a pamphlet of a 
very few pages, as it is possible for words illustrated by figures to 
explain them. In the history of the arts, now publishing by the 
French academy of sciences, several of them are actually ex- 
plained in this manner. The direction of operations, besides, which 
must be varied with every change of the weather, as well as with 
many other accidents, requires much more judgment and discretion. 

Below, pp. 619, 620, 

^ Descriptions des Arts et Mitiers fcdtes ou approuvees par Messieur!> de 
VAcademie Royale des Sciences, 1761-88. 



INEQUALITIES OE WAGES AND PROFIT ^27 

than that of those which are always the same or very nearly the 
same. 

Not only the art of the farmer, the general direction of the opera- 
tions of husbandry, but many inferior branches of country labour, 
require much more skill and experience than the greater part of me- 
chanic trades. The man who works upon brass and iron, works with 
instruments and upon materials of which the temper is always the 
same, or very nearly the same. But the man who ploughs the ground 
with a team of horses or oxen, works with instruments of which the 
health, strength, and temper, are very different upon different oc- 
casions. The condition of the materials which he works upon too is 
as variable as that of the instruments which he works with, and both 
require to be managed with much judgment and discretion. The 
common ploughman, though generally regarded as the pattern of 
stupidity and ignorance, is seldom defective in this judgment and 
discretion. He is less accustomed, indeed, to social intercourse than 
the mechanic who lives in a town. His voice and language are more 
uncouth and more difficult to be understood by those who are not 
used to them. His understanding, however, being accustomed to 
consider a greater variety of objects, is generally much superior to 
that of the other, whose whole attention from morning till night 
is commonly -occupied in performing one or two very simple opera- 
tions. How much the lower ranks of people in the country are really 
superior to those of the town, is well known to every man whom 
either business or curiosity has led to converse much with both.'^^ 
In China and Indostan accordingly both the rank and’the wages of 
country labourers are said to be superior to those of the greater part 
of artificers and manufacturers. They would probably be so every- 
where, if corporation laws and the corporation spirit did not pre- 
vent it. 

The superiority which the industry of the towns has every-where 
in Europe over that of the country, is not altogether owing to cor- 
porations and corporation laws. It is supported by many other regu- 
lations. The high duties upon foreign manufactures and upon all 
goods imported by alien merchants, all tend to the same purpose. 
Corporation laws enable the inhabitants of towns to raise their 
prices, without fearing to be under-sold by the free competition of 
their ov^n countrymen. Those other regulations secure them equally 
against that of foreigners. The enhancement of price occasioned by 
both is every-where finally paid by the landlords, farmers, and la- 
bourers of the country, who have seldom opposed the establishment 
of such monopolies. They have commonly neither inclination nor 

Lectures, p. 255. 


or for the 
inferior 
branches 
of coun- 
try la- 
bour, 
which re- 
quire 
more skill 
than most 
mechanic 
trades. 


The su- 
periority 
of town 
industry 
is en- 
hanced by 
other 
regula- 
tions, such 
as high 
duties on 
foreign 
manufac- 
tures. 



128 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

fitness to enter into combinations; and the clamour and sophistry 
of merchants and manufacturers easily persuade them that the 
private interest of a part, and of a subordinate part of the society, is 
the general interest of the whole. 

The su- In Great Britain the superiority of the industry of the towns over 
periority that of the country, seems to have been greater formerly than in 

c^Sin P^^sent times. The wages of country labour approach nearer to 
Great those of manufacturing labour, and the profits of stock employed in 

Britain. agriculture to those of trading and manufacturing stock, than they 

are said to have done in the last century, or in the beginning of the 
present. This change may be regarded as the necessary, though very 
late consequence of the extraordinary encouragement given to the 
industry of the towns. The stock accumulated in them comes in time 
to be so great, that it can no longer be employed with the ancient 
profit in that species of industry which is peculiar to them. That in- 
dustry has its limits like every other; and the increase of stock, by 
increasing the competition, necessarily reduces the profit. The 
lowering of profit in the town forces out stock to the country, where, 
by creating a new demand for country labour, it necessarily raises 
its wages. It then spreads itself, if I may say so, over the face of the 
land, and by being employed in agriculture is in part restored to the 
country, at the expence of which, in a great measure, it had orig- 
inally been accumulated in the town. That every-where in Europe 
the greatest improvements of the country have been owing to such 
overflowings of the stock originally accumulated in the towns, I 
shall endeavour to show hereafter; and at the same time to dem- 
onstrate, that though some countries have by this course attained 
to a considerable degree of opulence, it is in itself necessarily slow, 
uncertain, liable to be disturbed and interrupted by innumerable 
accidents, and in every respect contrary to the order of nature and 
of reason. The interests, prejudices, laws and customs which have 
given occasion to it, I shall endeavour to explain as fully and dis- 
tinctly as I can in the third and fourth books of this inquiry. 
Meetings People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merri- 
ment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy 
same against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices. It is im- 
possible indeed to prevent such meetings, by any law which either 
to be fa- executed, or would be consistent with liberty and justice, 

dlitated, But though the law cannot hinder people of the same traae from 
sometimes assembling together, it ought to do nothing to facilitate 
such assemblies; much less to render them necessary. 

as by A regulation which obliges all those of the same trade in a par- 

registra- ^ 

®°Bdow, pp. 384-396. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^^9 

ticular town to enter their names and places of abode in a public 
register, facilitates such assemblies. It connects individuals who 
might never otherwise be known to one another, and gives every 
man of the trade a direction where to find every other man of it. 

A regulation which enables those of the same trade to tax them- 
selves in order to provide for their poor, their sick, their widows and 
orphans, by giving them a common interest to manage, renders such 
assemblies necessary. 

An incorporation not only renders them necessary, but makes the 
act of the majority binding upon the whole. In a free trade an ef- 
fectual combination cannot be established but by the unanimous 
consent of every single trader,®^ and it cannot last longer than every 
single trader continues of the same mind. The majority of a cor- 
poration can enact a bye-law with proper penalties, which will limit 
the competition more effectually and more durably than any volun- 
tary combination whatever. 

The pretence that corporations are necessary for the better gov- 
ernment of the trade, is without any foundation. The real and ef- 
fectual discipline which is exercised over a workman, is not that of 
his corporation, but that of his customers. It is the fear of losing 
their employment which restrains his frauds and corrects his negli- 
gence. An exclusive corporation necessarily weakens the force of this 
discipline. A particular set of workmen must then be employed, let 
them behave well or ill. It is upon this account, that in many large 
incorporated towns no tolerable workmen are to be found, even in 
some of the most necessary trades. If you would have your work 
tolerably executed, it must be done in the suburbs, where the work- 
men, having no exclusive privilege, have nothing but their char- 
acter to depend upon, and you must then smuggle it into the town 
as well as you can. 

It is in this manner that the policy of Europe, by restraining the 
competition in some employments to a smaller number than would 
otherwise be disposed to enter into them, occasions a very important 
inequality in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the 
different employments of labour and stock. 

Secondly, The policy of Europe, by increasing the competition 
in some employments beyond what it naturally would be, occasions 
another inequality of an opposite kind in the whole of the advan- 
tages and disadvantages of the different employments of labour and 
stock. 

It has been considered as of so much importance that a proper 
number of young people should be educated for certain professions, 

“ Ed. I reads ‘‘single member of it” here and in the next line. 


tion of 
traders, 


by the es- 
tablish- 
ment of 
funds for 
the sick, 
widows 
and or- 
phans, 

or by in- 
corpora- 
tion. 


Corpora- 
tions are 
unneces- 
sary, and 
corrupt 
the work- 
men. 


( 2 ) The 
policy of 
Europe 
increases 
competi- 
tion in 
some 
trades. 



It cheap- 
ens the 
education 
of the 
clergy 
and there- 
by re- 
duces 
their 
earnings; 


130 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

that, sometimes the public, and sometimes the piety of private 
founders have established many pensions, scholarships, exhibitions, 
bursaries, &c. for this purpose, which draw many more people into 
those trades than could otherwise pretend to follow them. In all 
Christian countries, I believe, the education of the greater part of 
churchmen is paid for in this manner. Very few of them are edu- 
cated altogether at their own expence. The long, tedious, and ex- 
pensive education, therefore, of those who are, will not always pro- 
cure them a suitable reward, the church being crowded with people 
who, in order to get employment, are willing to accept of a much 
smaller recompence than what such an education would otherwise 
have entitled them to; and in this manner the competition of the 
poor takes away the reward of the rich. It would be indecent, no 
doubt, to compare either a curate or a chaplain with a journeyman 
in any common trade. The pay of a curate or chaplain, however, 
may very properly be considered as of the same nature with the 
wages of a journeyman. They are, all three, paid for their work ac- 
cording to the contract which they may happen to make with their 
respective superiors. Till after the middle of the fourteenth century, 
five merks, containing about as much silver as ten pounds of our 
present money, was in England the usual pay of a curate or 
stipendiary parish priest, as we find it regulated by the decrees of 
several different national councils.*"^^ At the same period four pence 
a day, containing the same quantity of silver as- a shilling of our 
present money, was declared to be the pay of a master mason, and 
three pence a day, equal to nine pence of our present money, that of 
a journeyman mason.®^ The wages of both these labourers, there- 
fore, supposing them to have been constantly employed, were much 
superior to those of the curate. The wages of the master mason, 
supposing him to have been without employment one third of the 
year, would have fully equalled them. By the 12 th of Queen Anne, 
c. 12, it is declared, ^That whereas for want of sufficient mainte- 
nance and encouragement to curates, the cures have in several places 
been meanly supplied, the bishop is, therefore, empowered to ap- 
point by writing under his hand and seal a sufficient certain stipend 
or allowance, not exceeding fifty and not less than twenty pounds 
a year.” Forty pounds a year is reckoned at present very good pay 

“ Eds. 4 and 5 erroneously insert “a” here. 

“According to Richard Burn’s Ecclesiastical Law, 1763, s,v Curates, six 
marks was the pay ordered by a constitution of Archbishop Islip till 1378, 
when it was raised to eight. 

“^See the Statute of labourers, 25 Ed. III. Below, p. 177. The note is not 
in ed. i. 

“The quotation is not intended to be verbatim, in spite of the inverted 
commas. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT 

for a curate, and notwithstanding this act of parliament, there are 
many curacies under twenty pounds a year. There are journe3niien 
shoemakers in London who earn forty pounds a year, and there is 
scarce an industrious workman of any kind in that metropolis who 
does not earn more than twenty. This last sum indeed does not ex- 
ceed what is frequently earned by common labourers in many coun- 
try parishes. Whenever the law has attempted to regulate the wages 
of workmen, it has always been rather to lower them than to raise 
them. But the law has upon many occasions attempted to raise 
the wages of curates, and for the dignity of the church, to oblige the 
rectors of parishes to give them more than the wretched mainte- 
nance which they themselves might be willing to accept of. And in 
both cases the law seems to have been equally ineffectual, and has 
never either been able to raise the wages of curates, or to sink those 
of labourers to the degree that was intended; because it has never 
been able to hinder either the one from being willing to accept of 
less than the legal allowance, on account of the indigence of their 
situation and the multitude of their competitors; or the other from 
receiving more, on account of the contrary competition of those who 
expected to derive either profit or pleasure from employing them. 

The great benefices and other ecclesiastical dignities support the 
honour of the church, notwithstanding the mean circumstances of‘ 
some of its inferior members. The respect paid to the profession too 
makes some compensation even to them for the meanness of their 
pecuniary recompence. In England, and in all Roman Catholic 
countries, the lottery of the church is in reality much more ad- 
vantageous than is necessary. The example of the church of Scot- 
land, of Geneva, and of several other protestant churches, may 
satisfy us, that in so creditable a profession, in which education is 
so easily procured, the hopes of much more moderate benefices will 
draw a sufficient number of learned, decent, and respectable men 
into holy orders. 

In professions in which there are no benefices, such as law and 
physic, if an equal proportion of people were educated at the pub- 
lic expence, the competition would soon be so great, as to sink very 
much their pecuniary reward. It might then not be worth any man’s 
while to educate his son to either of those professions at his own ex- 
pence. They would be entirely abandoned to such as had been edu- 
cated by those public charities, whose numbers and necessities 
would oblige them in general to content themselves with a very 
miserable recompence, to the entire degradation of the now re- 
spectable professions of law and physic. 

That unprosperous race of men commonly called men of letters, 


so that it 
is only the 
great ben- 
efices, 
etc., 
which 
support 
the hon- 
our of the 
English 
and Ro- 
man 
Catholic 
Churches. 


The same 
cause, if 
present, 
would 
lower the 
reward of 
lawyers 
and phy- 
sicians, 


as it has 
done that 



of men of 
letters, 


and that 
of 

teachers, 


who were 
much bet- 
ter paid 
in ancient 
times. 


132 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

is pretty much in the situation which lawyers and physicians prob- 
ably would be in upon the foregoing supposition. In every part of 
Europe the greater part of them have been educated for the church, 
but have been hindered by different reasons from entering into holy 
orders. They have generally, therefore, been educated at the public 
expence, and their numbers are every-where so great as commonly 
to reduce the price of their labour to a very paultry recompence. 

Before the invention of the art of printing, the only employment 
by which a man of letters could make any thing by his talents, was 
that of a public or private teacher, or by communicating to other 
people the curious and useful knowledge which he had acquired 
himself: And this is still surely a more honourable, a more useful, 
and in general even a more profitable employment than that other 
of wTiting for a bookseller, to which the art of printing has given oc- 
casion. The time and study, the genius, knowledge, and application 
requisite to qualify an eminent teacher of the sciences, are at least 
equal to what is necessary for the greatest practitioners in law and 
physic. But the usual reward of the eminent teacher bears no pro- 
portion to that of the lawyer or physician; because the trade of the 
one is crowded with indigent people who have been brought up to it 
at the public expence; whereas those of the other two are incum- 
bered with very few who have not been educated at their own. The 
usual recompence, however, of public and private teachers, small 
as it may appear, would undoubtedly be less than it is, if the com- 
petition of those yet more indigent men of letters who write for 
bread was not taken out of the market. Before the invention of the 
art of printing, a scholar and a beggar seem to have been terms very 
nearly synonymous. The different governors of the universities be- 
fore tibat time appear to have often granted licences to their scholars 
to beg.®'^ 

In ancient times, before any charities of this kind had been estab- 
lished for the education of indigent people to the learned profes- 
sions, the rewards of eminent teachers appear to have been much 
more considerable. Isocrates, in what is called his discourse against 
the sophists, reproaches the teachers of his own times with incon- 
sistency. ^They make the most magnificent promises to their schol- 
ars, says he, and undertake to teach them to be wise, to be happy, 
and to be just, and in return for so important a service they stipu- 
late the paultry reward of four or five minae. They who teach wis- 
dom, continues he, ought certainly to be wise themselves; but if 

“ Ed, I does not contain “or private ” 

®^Huine, History, ed. of 1773, vol. iii., p. 403, quotes n Hen. VIL, c. 22, 
which forbids students to beg without permission from the chancellor. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^33 

any man were to sell such a bargain for such a price, he would be 
convicted of the most evident folly.” He certainly does not mean 
here to exaggerate the reward, and we may be assured that It was 
not less than he represents it. Four minse were equal to thirteen 
pounds six shillings and eight pence: five minse to sixteen pounds 
thirteen shillings and four pence. Something not less than the larg- 
est of those two sums, therefore, must at that time have been usually 
paid to the most eminent teachers at Athens. Isocrates himself de- 
manded ten minse,®® or thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight 
pence, from each scholar. When he taught at Athens, he is said to 
have had an hundred scholars. I understand this to be the number 
whom he taught at one time, or who attended what we would call 
one course of lectures, a number which will not appear extraordin- 
ary from so great a city to so famous a teacher, who taught too 
what was at that time the most fashionable of all sciences, rhetoric. 
He must have made, therefore, by each course of lectures, a thou- 
sand minae, or 3,333/. 6 s. Sd. A thousand minae, accordingly, is said 
by Plutarch in another place, to have been his Didactron, or usual 
price of teaching.®^ Many other eminent teachers in those times ap- 
pear to have acquired great fortunes. Gorgias made a present to the 
temple of Delphi of his own statue in solid gold.®^ We must not, I 
presume, suppose that it was as large as the life. His way of living, 
as well as that of Hippias and Protagoras, two other eminent teach- 
ers of those times, is represented by Plato as splendid even to os- 
tentation.®® Plato himself is said to have lived with a good deal of 
magnificence. Aristotle, after having been tutor to Alexander, and 
most munificently rewarded, as it is universally agreed, both by 
him and his father Philip,®^ thought it worth while, notwithstand- 
ing, to return to Athens, in order to resume the teaching of his 
school. Teachers of the sciences were probably in those times less 

®®Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 

3> 4. A very free but not incorrect translation. Arbuthnot, Tables of 
Ancient Coins, Weights and Measures, 2nd ed., 1754, p. 198, refers to but 
does not quote the passage as his authority for stating the reward of a sophist 
at four or five minae. He treats the mina as equal to £3 4s. 7d., which at the 
rate of 62s. to the pound troy is considerably too low. 

Plutarch, Demosthenes, c. v., § 3 ; Isocrates, § 30. 

Arbuthnot, Tables of Ancient Coins, p. 198, says, “Isocrates had from 
his disciples a didactron or reward of 1,000 minse, £3,229 3s. 4d.,” and quotes 
“Pint, in Isocrate,” which says nothing about a “didactron,” but only that 
Isocrates charged ten minae and had 100 pupils. — §§ 9, 12, 30. 

®^This story is from Pliny, H. N., xxxiii., cap. iv., who remarks, “Tantus 
erat docendae oratoriae quaestus,” but the commentators point out that 
earlier authorities ascribe the erection of the statue not to Gorgias, but to 
the whole of Greece. 

®®It is difficult to discover on what passage this statement is based. 

Plutarch, Alexander. 



Perhaps 

this 

cheapness 
of teach- 
ing is no 
disad- 
vantage 
to the 
public. 


( 3 ) The 
policy of 
Europe 
obstructs 
the free 
circula- 
tion of 
labour. 

Appren- 
ticeship 
and cor- 
poration 
privileges 
obstruct 
circula- 
tion from 
employ- 
ment to 
employ- 
ment and 
from 
place to 
place. 

So that 
the 


134 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

common than they came to be in an age or two afterwards, when 
the competition had probably somewhat reduced both the price of 
their labour and the admiration for their persons. The most emin- 
ent of them, however, appear always to have enjoyed a degree of 
consideration much superior to any of the like profession in the 
present times. The Athenians sent Carneades the academic, and 
Diogenes the stoic, upon a solemn embassy to Rome; and though 
their city had then declined from its former grandeur, it was still 
an independent and considerable republic. Carneades too was a 
Babylonian by birth,®® and as there never was a people more jealous 
of admitting foreigners to public offices than the Athenians, their 
consideration for him must have been very great. 

This inequality is upon the whole, perhaps, rather advantageous 
than hurtful to the public. It may somewhat degrade the profession 
of a public teacher; but the Cheapness of literary education is 
surely an advantage which greatly over-balances this trifling incon- 
veniency. The public too might derive still greater benefit from it, 
if the constitution of those schools and colleges, in which education 
is carried on, was more reasonable than it is at present through the 
greater part of Europe.®® 

Thirdly, The policy of Europe, by obstructing the free circulation 
of labour and stock both from employment to employment, and 
from place to place, occasions in some cases a very inconvenient in- 
equality in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages of their 
different employments. 

The statute of apprenticeship ®^ obstructs the free circulation of 
labour from one employment to another, even in the same place. 
The exclusive privileges of corporations obstruct it from one place 
to another, even in the same employment. 

It frequently happens that while high wages are given to the 
workmen in one manufacture, those in another are obliged to con- 
tent themselves with bare subsistence. The one is in an advancing 
state, and has, therefore, a continual demand for new hands: The 
other is in a declining state, and the super-abundance of hands is 
continually increasing. Those two manufactures may sometimes be 
in the same town, and sometimes in the same neighbourhood, with- 
out being able to lend the least assistance to one another. The stat- 
ute of apprenticeship may oppose it in the one case, and both that 
and an exclusive corporation in the other. In many different manu- 
factures, however, the operations are so much alike, that the work- 

®This is a slip, Carneades was a native of Cyrene, and it was his col- 
league Diogenes who was a Babylonian by birth. 

“ Below, pp. 716-728. Above, p. 120. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^35 

men could easily change trades with one another, if those absurd 
laws did not hinder them. The arts of weaving plain linen and plain 
silk, for example, are almost entirely the same. That of weaving 
plain woollen is somewhat different; but the difference is so in- 
significant, that either a linen or a silk weaver might become a 
tolerable workman in a very few days. If any of those three capital 
manufactures, therefore, were decaying, the workmen might find a 
resource in one of the other two which was m a more prosperous 
condition; and their wages would neither rise too high in the thriv- 
ing, nor sink too low in the decaying manufacture. The linen manu- 
facture indeed is, in England, by a particular statute,^® open to 
every body; but as it is not much cultivated through the greater 
part of the country, it can afford no general resource to the work- 
men of other decaying manufactures, who, wherever the statute of 
apprenticeship takes place, have no other choice but either to come 
upon the parish, or to work as common labourers, for which, by 
their habits, they are much worse qualified than for any sort of 
manufacture that bears any resemblance to their own. They gen- 
erally, therefore, chuse to come upon the parish. 

Whatever obstructs the free circulation of labour from one em- 
ployment to another, obstructs that of stock likewise; the quantity 
of stock which can be employed in any branch of business depend- 
ing very much upon that of the labour which can be employed in 
it. Corporation laws, however, give less obstruction to the free cir- 
culation of stock from one place to another than to that of labour. 
It is every-where much easier for a wealthy merchant to obtain the 
privilege of trading in a town corporate, than for a poor artificer to 
obtain that of working in it. 

The obstruction which corporation laws give to the free circula- 
tion of labour is common, I believe, to every part of Europe. That 
which is given to it by the poor laws is, so far as I know,’’'^ peculiar 
to England. It consists in the difficulty which a poor man finds in 
obtaining a settlement, or even in being allowed to exercise his 
industry in any parish but that to which he belongs. It is the la- 
bour of artificers and manufacturers only of which the free circula- 
tion is obstructed by corporation laws. The difficulty of obtaining 
settlements obstructs even that of common labour. It may be worth 
while to give some account of the rise, progress, and present state of 
this disorder, the greatest perhaps of any in the police of England. 

When by the destruction of monasteries the poor had been de- 
prived of the charity of those religious houses, after some other in- 


changes of 
employ- 
ment 
necessary 
to equal- 
ise wages 
are pre- 
vented. 


What ob- 
structs the 
circula- 
tion of 
labour 
also ob- 
structs 
that of 
stock. 


In Eng- 
land the 
circula- 
tion of 
labour is 
further 
obstruct- 
ed by the 
poor law, 


Each par- 
ish was 


15 Car. II., c. 15 

Ed I places the “is” here. 


Ed I does not contain “the.’ 



to sup- 
port its 
own poor 
under 43 
Eliz., c. 2 ; 


these were 
deter- 
mined by 
13 and 14 
Car. 11 . to 
be such as 
had resid- 
ed forty 
days, 
within 
which 
time, 
however, 
a new in- 
habitant 
might be 
removed. 

Notice in 
writing 
was re- 
quired 
from the 
new in- 
habitant 
by I 

James IL 


Such 

notice 


136 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

effectual attempts for their relief, it was enacted by the 43d of 
Elizabeth, c. 2. that every parish should be bound to provide for its 
own poor; and that overseers of the poor should be annually ap- 
pointed, who, with the church-wardens, should raise, by a parish 
rate, competent sums for this purpose. 

By this statute the necessity of providing for their own poor was 
indispensably imposed upon every parish. Who were to be con- 
sidered as the poor of each parish, became, therefore, a question of 
some importance. This question, after some variation, was at last 
determined by the 13th and 14th of Charles when it was en- 
acted, that forty days undisturbed residence should gain any per- 
son a settlement in any parish; but that within that time it should 
be lawful for two justices of the peace, upon complaint made by 
the churchwardens or overseers of the poor, to remove any new in- 
habitant to the parish where he was last legally settled; unless he 
either rented a tenement of ten pounds a year, or could give such 
security for the discharge of the parish where he was then living, as 
those justices should judge sufficient. 

Some frauds, it is said, were committed in consequence of this 
statute; parish officers sometimes bribing their own poor to go 
clandestinely to another parish and by keeping themselves concealed 
for forty days to gain a settlement there, to the discharge of that to 
which they properly belonged. It was enacted, therefore, by the ist 
of James 11 .'^^ that the forty days undisturbed residence of any per- 
son necessary to gain a settlement, should be accounted only from 
the time of his delivering notice in writing, of the place of his abode 
and the number of his family, to one of the churchwardens or over- 
seers of the parish where he came to dwell. 

But parish officers, it seems, were not always more honest with 
regard to their own, than they had been with regard to other 

^C. 12. 

” This account of the provisions of the Acts regarding settlement, though 
not incorrect, inverts the order of the ideas which prompted them. The pre- 
amble complains that owing to defects in the law “poor people are not re- 
strained from going from one parish to another and therefore do endeavour 
to settle themselves in those parishes where there is the best stock,” and so 
forth, and the Act therefore gives the justices power, “within forty days 
after any such person or persons coming so to settle as aforesaid,” to remove 
them “to such parish where he or they were last legally settled either as a 
native, householder, sojourner, apprentice or servant for the space of forty 
days at the least.” The use of the term “settlement” seems to have originated 
with this Act. 

C. 17, “An act for reviving and continuance of several acts.” The reason 
given is that “such poor persons at their first coming to a parish do com- 
monly conceal themselves.” Nothing is said either here or in Burn’s Poor 
Law or Justice of the Peace about parish officers bribing their poor to go to 
another parish. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^37 

parishes, and sometimes connived at such intrusions, receiving the 
notice, and taking no proper steps in consequence of it. As every 
person in a parish, therefore, was supposed to have an interest to 
prevent as much as possible their being burdened by such intruders, 
it was further enacted by the 3d of William IIL^^ that the forty 
days residence should be accounted only from the publication of 
such notice in writing on Sunday in the church, immediately after 
divine service. 

^‘After all,’^ says Doctor Burn, “this kind of settlement, by con- 
tinuing forty days after publication of notice in writing, is very sel- 
dom obtained; and the design of the acts is not so much for gaining 
of settlements, as for the avoiding of them by persons coming into a 
parish clandestinely: for the giving of notice is only putting a force 
upon the parish to remove. But if a person’s situation is such, that 
it is doubtful whether he is actually removeable or not, he shall by 
giving of notice compel the parish either to allow him a settlement 
uncontested, by suffering him to continue forty days; or, by remov- 
ing him, to try the right.” 

This statute, therefore, rendered it almost impracticable for a 
poor man to gain a new settlement in the old way, by forty days in- 
habitancy. But that it might not appear to preclude altogether the . 
common people of one parish from ever establishing themselves 
with security in another, it appointed four other ways by which a 
settlement might be gained without any notice delivered or pub- 
lished. The first was, by being taxed to parish rates and paying 
them ; the second, by being elected into an annual parish office, and 
serving in it a year; the third, by serving an apprenticeship in the 
parish; the fourth, by being hired into service there for a year, and 
continuing in the same service during the whole of it.'^® 

Nobody can gain a settlement by either of the two first ways, but 
by the public deed of the whole parish, who are too well aware of the 
consequences to adopt any new-comer who has nothing but his la- 
bour to support him, either by taxing him to parish rates, or by 
electing him into a parish office. 

No married man can well gain any settlement in either of the two 
last ways. An apprentice is scarce ever married; and it is expressly 
enacted, that no married servant shall gain any settlement by being 
hired for a year.^^ The principal effect of introducing settlement by 
service, has been to put out in a great measure the old fashion of 

’*3 W. and M., c. ii, § 3. 

™ Richard Burn, Justice oj the Peace, 1764, vol. ii., p. 253. 

’^§§ 6 , 8 . 

§ 7 confines settlement by service to unmarried persons without chil- 
dren. 


was to be 
published 
in church 
under 3 
W.III. 


There 
were four 
other 
ways of 
gaining 
a settle- 
ment, 


two of 
which 
were im- 
possible 
to all 
poor men, 

and the 
other two 
to all 
married 
men, 



and to all 
independ- 
ent work- 
men. 


Certifi- 
cates were 
invented 
to enable 
persons to 


138 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

hiring for a year, which before had been so customary in England, 
that even at this day, if no particular term is agreed upon, the law 
intends that every servant is hired for a year. But masters are not 
always willing to give their servants a settlement by hiring them in 
this manner ; and servants are not always willing to be so hired, be- 
cause, as every last settlement discharges all the foregoing, they 
might thereby lose their original settlement in the places of their 
nativity, the habitation of their parents and relations. 

No independent workman, it is evident, whether labourer or 
artificer, is likely to gain any new settlement either by apprentice- 
ship or by service. When such a person, therefore, carried his in- 
dustry to a new parish, he was liable to be removed, how healthy 
and industrious soever, at the caprice of any churchwarden or over- 
seer, unless he either rented a tenement of ten pounds a year, a 
thing impossible for one who has nothing but his labour to live by; 
or could give such security for the discharge of the parish as two 
justices of the peace should judge sufficient. What security they 
shall require, indeed, is left altogether to their discretion; but they 
cannot well require less than thirty pounds, it having been enacted, 
that the purchase even of a freehold estate of less than thirty pounds 
•value, shall not gain any person a settlement, as not being sufficient 
for the discharge of the parish.^^ But this is a security which scarce 
any man who lives by labour can give; and much greater security is 
frequently demanded. 

In order to restore in some measure that free circulation of la- 
bour which those different statutes had almost entirely taken 
away,”^® the invention of certificates was fallen upon. By the 8th and 
9th of William III.®^ it was enacted, that if any person should 

9 Geo. I, c. 7. 

™The Act, 13 & 14 Car. II., c. 12, giving the justices power to remove the 
immigrant within forty days was certainly obstructive to the free circulation 
of labour, but the other statutes referred to in the text, by making the at- 
tainment of a settlement more difficult, would appear to have made it less 
necessary for a parish to put in force the power of removal, and therefore to 
have assisted rather than obstructed the free circulation of labour. The poor 
law commissioners of 1834, long after the power of removal had been abol- 
ished in 1795, found the law of settlement a great obstruction to the free 
circulation of labour, because men were afraid of gaining a new settlement, 
not because a new settlement was denied them. 

C. 30, “An act for supplying some defects in the laws for the relief of 
the poor of this kingdom ” The preamble recites, “Forasmuch as many poor 
persons chargeable to the parish, township or place where they live, merely 
for want of work, would in any other place when sufficient employment is 
to be had maintain themselves and families without being burdensome to 
any parish, township or place.” But certificates were invented long before 
to. The Act 13 & 14 Car. II., c. 12, provides for their issue to persons going 
into another parish for harvest or any other kind of work, and the preamble 
of 8 & 9 W. III., c. 30, shows that they were commonly given. Only tempo- 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^39 

bring a certificate from the parish where he was last legally settled, 
subscribed by the churchwardens and overseers of the poor, and al- 
lowed by two justices of the peace, that every other parish should 
be obliged to receive him; that he should not be removeable merely 
upon account of his being likely to become chargeable, but only up- 
on his becoming actually chargeable, and that then the parish which 
granted the certificate should be obliged to pay the expence both of 
his maintenance and of his removal And in order to give the most 
perfect security to the parish where such certificated man should 
come to reside, it was further enacted by the same statute,®^ that 
he should gain no settlement there by any means whatever, except 
either by renting a tenement of ten pounds a year, or by serving 
upon his own account in an annual parish office for one whole year; 
and consequently neither by notice, nor by service, nor by appren- 
ticeship, nor by paying parish rates. By the 12th of Queen Anne too, 
stat. I. c, 18. it was further enacted, that neither the servants nor 
apprentices of such certificated man should gain any settlement in 
the parish where he resided under such certificate.®^ 

How far this invention has restored that free circulation of la- 
bour which the preceding statutes had almost entirely taken away, 
we may learn from the following very judicious observation of Doc- 
tor Burn. ^‘It is obvious,” says he, “that there are divers good rea- 
sons for requiring certificates with persons coming to settle in any 
place; namely, that persons residing under them can gain no settle- 
ment, neither by apprenticeship, nor by service, nor by giving no- 
tice, nor by paying parish rates; that they can settle neither appren- 
tices nor servants; that if they become chargeable, it is certainly 
known whither to remove them, and the parish shall be paid for the 
removal, and for their maintenance in the mean time; and that if 
they fall sick, and cannot be removed, the parish which gave the 
certificate must maintain them: none of all which can be without 
a certificate. Which reasons will hold proportionably for parishes 
not granting certificates in ordinary cases; for it is far more than 
an equal chance, but that they will have the certificated persons 
again, and in a worse condition.” The moral of this observation 
seems to be, that certificates ought always to be required by the 
parish where any poor man comes to reside, and that they ought 
very seldom to be granted by that which he proposes to leave. 

rary employment, however, was contemplated, and, on the expiration of the 
job, the certificated person became removable. 

Rather by the explanatory Act, 9 & 10 W. III., c. ii. 

All these statutes are conveniently collected in Richard Burn’s History 
of the Poor Laws, 1764, pp. 94-100 
®®Bum, Justice of the Peace, 1764, vol. ii., p. 274. 


reside in 
a parish 
without 
being im- 
mediately 
removable 
and with- 
out gain- 
ing a set- 
tlement. 


Certifi- 
cates were 
required 
by the 
new par- 
ish but 
refused by 
the old. 



The 

courts de- 
clined to 
torce 
overseers 
to give a 
certificate. 


This law 
is the 
cause of 
the very 
unequal 
price of 
labour in 
Englaivi, 


140 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

“There is somewhat of hardship in this matter of certificates,” 
says the same very intelligent Author, in his History of , the Poor 
Laws, ‘'by putting it in the power of a parish officer, to imprison a 
man as it were for life; however inconvenient it may be for him to 
continue at that place where he has had the misfortune to acquire 
what is called a settlement, or whatever advantage he may propose 
to himself by living elsewhere.” 

Though a certificate carries along with it no testimonial of good 
behaviour, and certifies nothing but that the person belongs to the 
parish to which he really does belong, it is altogether discretionary 
in the parish officers either to grant or to refuse it. A mandamus was 
once moved for, says Doctor Bum, to compel the churchwardens 
and overseers to sign a certificate; but the court of King’s Bench 
rejected the motion as a very strange attempt.®^ 

The very unequal price of labour which we frequently find in 
England in places at no great distance from one another, is prob- 
ably owing to the obstruction which the law of settlements gives to 
a poor man who would carry his industry from one parish to an- 
other without a certificate. A single man, indeed, who is healthy and 
industrious, may sometimes reside by sufferance without one; but 
a man with a wife and family who should attempt to do so, would in 
most parishes be sure of being removed, and if the single man 
should afterwards marry, he would generally be removed likewise.®® 
The scarcity of hands in one parish, therefore, cannot always be re- 
lieved by their superabundance in another, as it is constantly in 
Scotland, and, I believe, in all other countries where there is no 
difficulty of settlement. In such countries, though wages may some- 
times rise a little in the neighbourhood of a great town, or wherever 
else there is an extraordinary demand for labour, and sink gradu- 
ally as the distance from such places increases, till they fall back to 
the common rate of the country; yet we never meet with those sud- 
den and unaccountable differences in the wages of neighbouring 
places which we sometimes find in England, where it is often more 
difficult for a poor man to pass the artificial boundary of a parish, 
than an arm of the sea or a ridge of high mountains, natural bound- 
aries which sometimes separate very distinctly different rates of 
wages in other countries. 

^ Burn, History of the Poor Laws, 1764, pp. 235, 236, where it is observed 
that “it was the easy method of obtaining a settlement by a residency of 
forty days that brought parishes into a state of war against the poor and 
against one another ” and that if settlement were reduced to the place of 
birth or of inhabitancy for one or more years, certificates would be got rid of. 

“ Burn, Justice, vol. ii., p. 209. The date given is 1730. 

Since the fact of the father having no settlement would not free the par- 
ish from the danger of having at some future time to support the children. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^41 

To remove a man who has committed no misdemeanour from the 
parish where he chuses to reside, is an evident violation of natural 
liberty and justice. The common people of England, however, so 
jealous of their liberty, but like the common people of most other 
countries never rightly understanding wherein it consists, have now 
for more than a century together suffered themselves to be exposed 
to this oppression without a remedy. Though men of reflection too 
have sometimes complained of the law of settlements as a public 
grievance; yet it has never been the object of any general popular 
clamour, such as that against general warrants, an abusive prac- 
tice undoubtedly, but such a one as was not likely to occasion any 
general oppression. There is scarce a poor man in England of forty 
years of age, I will venture to say, who has not in some part of his 
life felt himself most cruelly oppressed by this ill-contrived law 
of settlements. 

I shall conclude this long chapter with observing, that though an- 
ciently it was usual to rate wages, first by general laws extending 
over the whole kingdom, and afterwards by particular orders of the 
justices of peace in every particular county, both these practices 
have now gone entirely into disuse. “By the experience of above four 
hundred years,” says Doctor Bum, “it seems time to lay aside all 
endeavours to bring under strict regulations, what in its own nature 
seems incapable of minute limitation: for if all persons in the same 
kind of work were to receive equal wages, there would be no emu- 
lation, and no room left for industry or ingenuity.” 

Particular acts of parliament, however, still attempt sometimes 
to regulate wages in particular trades and in particular places. Thus 
the 8th of George III.®® prohibits under heavy penalties all master 

Some evidence in support of this assertion would have been acceptable. 
Sir Frederic M. Eden, State of the Poor, 1797, vol. i., pp. 296-298, may be 
consulted on the other side. William Hay’s Remarks on the Laws Relating 
to the Poor, 1735, which Eden regards as giving a very exaggerated view of 
the obstruction caused by the law of settlement, was in the Edinburgh Ad- 
vocates’ Library in 1776, and Adam Smith may have seen it. 

^ History of the Poor Laws, p. 130, loosely quoted. After “limitation” the 
passage runs, “as thereby it leaves no room for industry or ingenuity ; for if 
all persons in the same kind of work were to' receive equal wages there would 
be no emulation.” 

^ 7 Geo. L, stat. i, c. 13, was passed, according to its preamble, because 
journeymen taylors had lately departed from their service without just 
cause, and had entered into “combinations to advance their wages to un- 
reasonable prices, and lessen their usual hours of work, which is of evil ex- 
ample, and manifestly tends to the prejudice of trade, to the encouragement 
of idleness, and to the great increase of the poor.” It prescribed hours, 6 a.m. 
to 8 P.M., and wages, 2s. a day in the second quarter and is. 8d. for the rest 
of the year. Quarter sessions might alter these rates. This Act was amended 
by 8 Geo. III., c. 17, under which the hours were to be 6 a.m. to 7 p.m., and 
wages a maximum of 2s. 7^ d. a day. Masters inside the area were forHd- 


andan 

evident 

violation 

of natural 

liberty, 

though 

tamely 

submitted 

to. 


Wages 
were an- 
ciently 
rated by 
law or by 
justices of 
peace. 


London 
taylors’ 
wages are 



still rated 
by law. 


Attempts 
were also 
made to 
regulate 
profits by 
fixing 
prices, 
and the 
assize of 
bread still 
remains. 


142 the wealth of nations 

taylors in London, and five miles round it, from giving, and their 
workmen from accepting, more than two shillings and sevenpence 
halfpenny a day, except in the case of a general mourning. When- 
ever the legislature attempts to regulate the diSerences between 
masters and their workmen, its counsellors are always the masters. 
When the regulation, therefore, is in favour of the workmen, it is 
always just and equitable; but it is sometimes otherwise when in 
favour of the masters. Thus the law which obliges the masters in 
several different trades to pay their workmen in money and not in 
goods, is quite just and equitable.^^ It imposes no real hardship 
upon the masters. It only obliges them to pay that value in money, 
which they pretended to pay, but did not always really pay, in 
goods. This law is in favour of the workmen; but the 8th of George 
III. is in favour of the masters. When masters combine together in 
order to reduce the wages of their workmen, they commonly enter 
into a private b(md or agreement, not to give more than a certain 
wage under a certain penalty. Were the workmen to enter into a 
contrary combination of the same kind, not to accept of a certain 
wage under a certain penalty, the law would punish them very se- 
verely; and if it dealt impartially, it would treat the masters in 
the same manner. But the 8th of George III. enforces by law that 
very regulation which masters sometimes attempt to establish by 
such combinations. The complaint of the workmen, that it puts the 
ablest and most industrious upon the same footing with an ordinary 
workman, seems perfectly well founded. 

In ancient times too it was usual to attempt to regulate the profits 
of merchants and other dealers, by rating the price both of provis- 
ions and other goods, The assize of bread is, so far as I know, the 
only remnant of this ancient usage. Where there is an exclusive cor- 
poration, it may perhaps be proper to regulate the price of the first 
neassary of life. But where there is none, the competition will 
regulate it much better than any assize. The method of fixing the 
assize of bread established by the 31st of George II.®^ could not be 
put in practice in Scotland, on account of a defect in the law; its 
execution depending upon the office of derk of the market, which 
does not exist there. This defect was not remedied till the 3d of 


dm to pay more to workers outside the area than was allowed by the Act 

I Ann., stat. 2, c. 18, applied to workmen, in the woollen, linen, fustian, 
cotton md iron mmufacture; 13 Geo. II., c. 8, to manufacturers of doves, 
boote, shoes and other leather wares. The second of these Acts only prohibits 
truck payments when made without the request and consent of the work- 
men. 

"C. 29. 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^43 

George III.^- The want of an assize occasioned no sensible incon- 
veniency, and the establishment of one in the few places where it 
has yet taken place, has produced no sensible advantage. In the 
greater part of the towns of Scotland, however, there is an incorpo- 
ration of bakers who claim exclusive privileges, though they are not 
very strictly guarded. 

The proportion between the different rates both of wages and 
profit in the different emplo3mients of labour and stock, seems not 
to be much affected, as has already been observed,^® by the riches 
or poverty, the advancing, stationary, or declining state of the so- 
ciety. Such revolutions in the public welfare, though they affect the 
general rates both of wages and profit, must in the end affect them 
equally in all different employments. The proportion between them, 
therefore, must remain the same, and cannot well be altered, at 
least for any considerable time, by any such revolutions. 

'’^C. 6. The preamble relates the defect. Above, p. 63. 


The in- 
equalities 
of wages 
and pro- 
fits are 
not much 
affected 
by the ad- 
vancing or 
declining 
state of 
the 

society. 



CHAPTER XI 


Rent is 
the pro- 
duce 
which is 
over what 
is neces- 
sary to 
pay the 
farmer 
ordinary 
profit. 


It is not 
merely 
interest 
on stock 
laid out 
in im- 
prove- 
ments, 


OF THE RENT OF LAND 

Rent, considered as the price paid for the use of land, is naturally 
the highest which the tenant can afford to pay in the actual cir- 
cumstances of the land. In adjusting the terms of the lease, the 
landlord endeavours to leave him no greater share of the produce 
than what is sufficient to keep up the stock from which he furnishes 
the seed, pays the labour, and purchases and maintains the cattle 
and other instruments of husbandry, together with the ordinary 
profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. This is evidently the 
smallest share with which the tenant can content himself without 
being a loser, and the landlord seldom means to leave him any 
more. Whatever part of the produce, or, what is the same thing, 
whatever part of its price, is over and above this share, he naturally 
endeavours to reserve to himself as the rent of his land, which is 
evidently the highest the tenant can afford to pay in the actual 
circumstances of the land. Sometimes, indeed, the liberality, more 
frequently the ignorance, of the landlord, makes him accept of 
somewhat less than this portion; and sometimes too, though more 
rarely, the ignorance of the tenant makes him undertake to pay 
somewhat more, or to content himself with somewhat less, than the 
ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. This por- 
tion, however, may still be considered as the natural rent of land, 
or the rent for which it is naturally meant that land should for the 
most part be let. 

The rent of land, it may be thought, is frequently no more than a 
reasonable profit or interest for the stock laid out by the landlord 
upon its improvement. This, no doubt, may be partly the case upon 
some occasions; for it can scarce ever be more than partly the case. 
The landlord demands a rent even for unimproved land, and the 
supposed interest or profit upon the expence of improvement is 
generally an addition to this original rent. Those improvements, 
besides, are not always made 4y the stock of the landlord, but 
sometimes by that of the tenant. When the lease comes to be re- 

144 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT HS 

newed, however, the landlord commonly demands the same aug- 
mentation of rent, as if they had been all made by his own. 

He sometimes demands rent for what is altogether incapable of 
human improvement. Kelp is a species of sea-weed, which, when 
burnt, yields an alkaline salt, useful for making glass, soap, and for 
several other purposes. It grows in several parts of Great Britain, 
particularly in Scotland, upon such rocks only as lie within the high 
water mark, which are twice every day covered with the sea, and of 
which the produce, therefore, was never augmented by human in- 
dustry. The landlord, however, whose estate is bounded by a kelp 
shore of this kind, demands a rent for it as much as for his corn 
fields. 

The sea in the neighbourhood of the islands of Shetland is more 
than commonly abundant in fish, which make a great part of the 
subsistence of their inhabitants. But in order to profit by the pro- 
duce of the water, they must have a habitation upon the neighbour- 
ing land. The rent of the landlord is in proportion, not to what the 
farmer can make by the land, but to what he can make both by 
the land and by ^ the water. It is partly paid in sea-fish; and one 
of the very few instances in which rent makes a part of the price 
of that commodity, is to be found in that country. 

The rent of land, therefore, considered as the price paid for the 
use of the land, is naturally a monopoly price. It is not at all pro- 
portioned to what the landlord may have laid out upon the im- 
provement of the land, or to what he can afford to take; but to 
what the farmer can afford to give. 

Such parts only of the produce of land can commonly be brought 
to market of which the ordinary price is sufficient to replace the 
stock which must be employed in bringing them thither, together 
with its ordinary profits. If the ordinary price is more than this, the 
surplus part of it will naturally go to the rent of the land. If it is 
not more, though the commodity may be brought to market, it can 
afford no rent to the landlord. Whether the price is, or is not more, 
depends upon the demand. 

There are some parts of the produce of land for which the de- 
mand must always be such as to afford a greater price than what is 
sufficient to bring them to market; and there are others for which it 
either may or may not be such as to afford this greater price. The 
former must always afford a rent to that landlord. The latter some- 
times may, and sometimes may not, according to different circum- 
stances. 

Rent, it is to be observed, therefore, enters into the composition 


and is 
sometimes 
obtained 
for land 
incapable 
of im- 
prove- 
ment, 
such as 
rocks 
where 
kelp 
grows; 

and for . 
the op- 
portunity 
to fish. 


It is 

therefore 
a monop- 
oly 
price. 


Whether 
particu- 
lar parts 
of pro- 
duce fetch 
a price 
sufficient 
to yield a 
rent de- 
pends on 
the de- 
mand. 

Some 
parts are 
always in 
sufficient 
demand; 
others 
sometimes 
are and 


^ “By” appears first in ed. 3* 



sometimes 
are not. 

Wages 
and profit 
are causes 
of price; 
rent is an 
effect. 

The chap- 
ter is di- 
vided into 
three 
parts. 


Food can 
always 
purchase 
as much 
labour as 
it can 
maintain. 


Almost all 
Ihnd pro- 
duces 
more than 
enough 
food to 
maintain 
^ the labour 
and pay 
the pro- 
fits, and 
therefore 


146 the wealth of nations 

of the price of commodities in a different way from wages and 
profit. High or low wages and profit, are the causes of high or low 
price; high or low rent is the effect of it. It is because high or low 
wages and profit must be paid, in order to bring a particular com- 
modity to market, that its price is high or low. But it is because its 
price is high or low; a great deal more, or very little more, or no 
more, than what is sufficient to pay those wages and profit, that it 
affords a high rent, or a low rent, or no rent at all. 

The particular consideration, first, of those parts of the produce 
of land which always afford some rent; secondly, of those which 
sometimes may and sometimes may not afford rent; and, thirdly, of 
the variations which, in the different periods of improvement, nat- 
urally take place, in the relative value of those two different sorts 
of rude produce, when compared both with one another and with 
manufactured commodities, will divide this chapter into three 
parts. 


Part I 

Of the Produce of Land which always awards Rent 

As men, like all other animals, naturally multiply in proportion to 
the means of their subsistence, food is always, more or less, in de- 
mand. It can always purchase or command a greater or smaller 
quantity of labour, and somebody can always be found who is will- 
ing to do something in order to obtain it. The quantity of labour, 
indeed, which it can purchase, is not always equal to what it could 
maintain, if managed in the most (economical manner, on account 
of the high wages which are sometimes given to labour. But it can 
always purchase such a quantity of labour as it can maintain, ac- 
cording to the rate at which that sort of labour is commonly main- 
tained in the neighbourhood. 

But land, in almost any situation, produces a greater quantity of 
food ffian what is sufficient to maintain all the labour necessary for 
bringing it to market, in the most liberal way in which that labour 
is ever maintained. The surplus too is always more than sufficient 
to replace the stock which employed that labour, together with its 
profits. Something, therefore, always remains for a rent to the land- 
lord. 

The most desart moors in Norway and Scotland produce some 
sort of pasture for cattle, of which the milk and the increase are 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT H 7 

always more than sufficient, not only to maintain all the labour 
necessary for tending them, and to pay the ordinary profit to the 
farmer or owner of the herd or flock; but to afford some small rent 
to the landlord. The rent mcreases in proportion to the goodness of 
the pasture. The same extent of ground not only maintains a great- 
er number of cattle, but as they are brought within a smaller com- 
pass, less labour becomes requisite to tend them, and to collect 
their produce. The landlord gains both ways; by the increase of the 
produce, and by the diminution of the labour which must be main- 
tained out of it. 

The rent of land not only varies with its fertility, whatever be 
its produce, but with its situation, whatever be its fertility.^ Land 
in the neighbourhood of a town gives a greater rent than land 
equally fertile in a distant part of the country. Though it may cost 
no more labour to cultivate the one than the other, it must always 
cost more to bring the produce of the distant land to market. A 
greater quantity of labour, therefore, must be maintained out of it; 
and the surplus, from which are drawn both the profit of the farm- 
er and the rent of the landlord, must be diminished. But in remote 
parts of the country the rate of profits, as has already been shown, ^ 
is generally higher than in the neighbourhood of a large town. A 
smaller proportion of this diminished surplus, therefore, must be- 
long to the landlord. 

Good roads, canals, and navigable rivers, by diminishing the 
expence of carriage, put the remote parts of the country more near- 
ly upon a level with those in the neighbourhood of the town. They 
are upon that account the greatest of all improvements. They en- 
courage the cultivation of the remote, which must always be the 
most extensive circle of the country. They are advantageous to the 
town, by breaking down the monopoly of the country in its neigh- 
bourhood. They are advantageous even to that part of the country. 
Though they introduce some rival commodities into the old mar- 
ket, they open many new markets to its produce. Monopoly, be- 
sides, is a great enemy to good management, which can never be 
universally established but in consequence of that free and uni- 
versal competition which forces everybody to have recourse to it 
for the sake of self-defence. It is not more than fifty years ago, that 
some of the counties in the neighbourhood of London petitioned 
the parliament against the extension of the turnpike roads into the 
remoter counties. Those remoter counties, they pretended, from the 

® Eds. 1 and 2 read ‘The rent of land varies with its fertility, whatever be 
its produce, and with its situation, whatever be its fertility.” 

® Above, pp. 89, 90. 


yields 

rent. 


The rent 
varies 
with situ- 
ation as 
well as 
with fer- 
tility. 


Good 
roads, 
etc., di- 
minish 
differ- 
ences of 
rent. 



Corn land 
yields a 
larger 
supply of 
food after 
maintain- 
ing labour 
than pas- 
ture. 


In early 

times 

meat is 

cheaper 

than 

bread, 


but later 
on it be- 
comes 
dearer, 


148 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

cheapness of labour, would be able to sell their grass and corn 
cheaper in the London market than themselves, and would thereby 
reduce their rents, and ruin their cultivation. Their rents, however, 
have risen, and their cultivation has been improved since that time. 

A corn field of moderate fertility produces a much greater quan- 
tity of food for man, than the best pasture of equal extent. Though 
its cultivation requires much more labour, yet the surplus which 
remains after replacing the seed and maintaining all that labour, is 
likewise much greater. If a pound of butcher^s-meat, therefore, was 
never supposed to be worth more than a pound of bread, this great- 
er surplus would every-where be of greater value, and constitute a 
greater fund both for the profit of the farmer and the rent of the 
landlord. It seems to have done so universally in the rude begin- 
nings of agriculture. 

But the relative values of those two different species of food, 
bread, and butcher^s-meat, are very different in the different periods 
of agriculture. In its rude beginnings, the unimproved wilds, which 
then occupy the far greater part of the country, are all abandoned 
to cattle. There is more butcher’s-meat than bread, and bread, 
therefore, is the food for which there is the greatest competition, 
and which consequently brings the greatest price. At Buenos Ayres, 
we are told by Ulloa, four reals, one-and-twenty pence halfpenny 
sterling, was, forty or fifty years ago, the ordinary price of an ox, 
chosen from a herd of two or three hundred.'* He says nothing of 
the price of bread, probably because he found nothing remarkable 
about it. An ox there, he says, costs little more than the labour of 
catching him. But com can no-where be raised without a great deal 
of labour, and in a country which lies upon the river Plate, at that 
time the direct road from Europe to the silver mines of Potosi, the 
money price of labour could not be very cheap. It is otherwise when 
cultivation is extended over the greater part of the country. There 
is then more bread than butcher^s-meat. The competition changes 
its direction, and the price of butcher's-meat becomes greater than 
the price of bread. 

By the extension besides of cultivation the unimproved wilds be- 
come insufficient to supply the demand for butcher’s-meat. A great 
part of the cultivated lands must be employed in rearing and fat- 
tening cattle, of which the price, therefore, must be sufficient to 
pay, not only the labour necessary for tending them, but the rent 

* Vol. i., p. 532, in the French translation of Juan and Ulloa’s work, Voy- 
age historique de VAmerique meridionale par don George Juan et don An- 
toine de Ulloa, 1752. The statement is repeated in almost the same words, 
substituting “three or four hundred” for “two or three hundred,” below, o. 

f 7 tr 



INEQUALITIES OF WAGES AND PROFIT ^49 
which the landlord and the profit which the farmer could have 
drawn from such land employed in tillage. The cattle bred upon the 
most uncultivated moors, when brought to the same market, are, in 
proportion to their weight or goodness, sold at the same price as 
those which are reared upon the most improved land. The pro- 
prietors of those moors profit by it, and raise the rent of their land 
in proportion to the price of their cattle. It is not more than a 
century ago that in many parts of the highlands of Scotland, 
butcher’s-meat was as cheap or cheaper than even bread made of 
oat-meal. The union opened the market of England to the highland 
cattle. Their ordinary price is at present about three times greater 
than at the beginning of the century, and the rents of many high- 
land estates have been tripled and quadrupled in the same time.® 
In almost every part of Great Britain a pound of the best butcher’s- 
meat is, in the present times, generally worth more than two pounds 
of the best white bread ; and in plentiful years it is sometimes worth 
three or four pounds. 

It is thus that in the progress of improvement the rent and 
profit of unimproved pasture come to be regulated in some measure 
by the rent and profit of what is improved, and these again by the 
rent and profit of corn. Corn is an annual crop. Butcher’s-meat, a 
crop which requires four or five years to grow. As an acre of land, 
therefore, will produce a much smaller quantity of the one species 
of food than of the other, the inferiority of the quantity must be 
compensated by the superiority of the price. If it was more than 
compensated, more corn land would be turned into pasture; and if 
it was not compensated, part of what was in pasture would be 
brought back into corn. 

This equality, however, between the rent and profit of grass and 
those of corn; of the land of which the immediate produce is food 
for cattle, and of that of which the immediate produce is food for 
men; must be understood to take place only through the greater 
part of the improved lands of a great country. In some particular 
local situations it is quite otherwise, and the rent and profit of grass 
are much superior to what can be made by corn. 

Thus in the neighbourhood of a great town, the demand ^or milk 
and for forage to horses, frequently contribute, together with the 
high price of butcher’s-meat, to raise the value of grass above what 
may be called its natural proportion to that of corn. This local 
advantage, it is evident, cannot be communicated to the lands at a 
distance. 

Particular circumstances have sometimes rendered some coun- 
^ See below, pp. 162, 220. 


and pas- 
ture yields 
as good a 
rent as 
corn land, 


and some- 
times a 
greater 
one, 


as in the 
neigh- 
bourhood 
of a great 
town. 



or all over 
a popu- 
lous coun- 
try 

which im- 
ports 
corn, 


such as 
Holland 
and an- 
cient 
Italy, 


and occa- 
sionally in 
a country 
where en- 
closure is 
unusual. 


Ordinarily 
the rent 


ISO the wealth of nations 

tries so populous, that the whole territory, like the lands in the 
neighbourhood of a great town, has not been sufficient to produce 
both the grass and the corn necessary for the subsistence of their 
inhabitants. Their lands, therefore, have been principally em- 
ployed in the production of grass, the more bulky commodity, and 
which cannot be so easily brought from a great distance; the corn, 
the food of the great body of the people, has been chiefly imported 
from foreign countries. Holland is at present in this situation, and a 
considerable part of ancient Italy seems to have been so during the 
prosperity of the Romans. To feed well, old Cato said, as we are 
told by Cicero, was the first and most profitable thing in the man- 
agement of a private estate; to feed tolerably well, the second; and 
to feed ill, the third. To plough, he ranked only in the fourth place 
of profit and advantage.® Tillage, indeed, in that part of ancient 
Italy which lay in the neighbourhood of Rome, must have been 
very much discouraged by the distributions of corn which were fre- 
quently made to the people, either gratuitously, or at a very low 
price. This corn was brought from the conquered provinces, of 
which several, instead of taxes, were obliged to furnish a tenth part 
of their produce at a stated price, about sixpence a peck, to the re- 
public.'^ The low price at which this corn was distributed to the 
people, must necessarily have sunk the price of what could be 
brought to the Roman market from Latium, or the ancient terri- 
tory of Rome, and must have discouraged its cultivation in that 
country. 

In an open country too, of which the principal produce is corn, a 
well-enclosed piece of grass will frequently rent higher than any 
corn field in its neighbourhood. It is convenient for the mainten- 
ance of the cattle employed in the cultivation of the corn, and its 
high rent is, in this case, not so properly paid from the value of its 
own produce, as from that of the corn lands which are cultivated 
by means of it. It is likely to fall, if ever the neighbouring lands are 
completely enclosed. The present high rent of enclosed land in 
Scotland seems owing to the scarcity of enclosure, and will prob- 
ably last no longer than that scarcity. The advantage of enclosure 
is greater for pasture than for corn. It saves the labour of guarding 
the cattle, which feed better too when they are not liable to be dis- 
turbed by their keeper or his dog. 

But where there is no local advantage of this kind, the rent and 
profit of corn, or whatever else is the common vegetable food of the 

® Cicero, De officiis, lib. ii. ad fin. Quoted in Lectures, p. 229. 

^See below, pp. 218, 219. 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD 

people, must naturally regulate, upon the land which is fit for pro- 
ducing it, the rent and profit of pasture. 

The use of the artificial grasses, of turnips, carrots, cabbages, 
and the other expedients which have been fallen upon to make an 
equal quantity of land feed a greater number of cattle than when 
in natural grass, should somewhat reduce, it might be expected, the 
superiority which, in an improved country, the price of butcher^s- 
meat naturally has over that of bread. It seems accordingly to have 
done so; and there is some reason for believing that, at least in the 
London market, the price of butcher’s-meat in proportion to the 
price of bread, is a good deal lower in the present times than it was 
in the beginning of the last century. 

In the appendix to the Life of Prince Henry^ Doctor Birch has 
given us an account of the prices of butcher^s-meat as commonly 
paid by that prince. It is there said that the four quarters of an ox 
weighing six hundred pounds usually cost him nine pounds ten 
shillings, or thereabouts; that is, thirty-one shillings and eight 
pence per hundred pounds weight.^ Prince Henry died on the 6th of 
November 1612, in the nineteenth year of his age.® 

In March 1764, there was a parliamentary inquiry into the 
causes of the high price of provisions at that time. It was then, 
among other proof to the same purpose, given in evidence by a Vir- 
ginia merchant, that in March 1763, he had victualled his ships for 
twenty-four or twenty-five shillings the hundred weight of beef, 
which he considered as the ordinary price; whereas, in that dear 
year, he had paid twenty-seven shillings for the same weight and 
sort.^® This high price in 1764 is, however, four shillings and eight 
pence cheaper than the ordinary price paid by prince Henry; and 
it is the best beef only, it must be observed, which is fit to be salted 
for those distant voyages. 

The price paid by prince Henry amounts to per pound 
weight of the whole carcase, coarse and choice pieces taken togeth- 
er; and at that rate the choice pieces could not have been sold by 
retail for less than 4^rf. or srf. the pound. 

In the parliamentary inquiry in 1764, the witness stated the 


of corn 
land 

regulates 
that of 
pasture. 

Improved 
methods 
of feed- 
ing cattle 
lower 
meat in 
propor- 
tion to 
bread. 

The price 
of meat 
was high- 
er at the 
beginning 
of the 
seven- 
teenth 
century 

than in 

1763-4; 


® The Lije of Henry Prince of Wales, by Thomas Birch, D.D., 1760, p. 346. 

^ Ibid., p. 271. 

A Report from the Committee who, upon the Uh day of February, 1764, 
were appointed to inquire into the Causes of the High Price of Provisions with 
the proceedings of the House thereupon. Published by order of the House of 
Commons, 1764, paragraph 4, where, however, there is no definite statement 
to the effect that the Virginia merchant, Mr. Capel Hanbury, considered 24s. 
or 25s. as the ordinary price. 



whereas 

wheat 

was 

cheaper. 


The rent 
and profit 
of corn 
land and 
pasture 
regulate 
those of 
all other 
land. 

The ap- 
parently 
greater 
rent or 
profit of 
some 
other 
kinds is 
only in- 
terest on 
greater 
expense, 

as in hop, 
and fruit 
gardens; 


152 the wealth of nations 

price of the choice pieces of the best beef to be to the consumer 4^. 
and 4^. the pound; and the coarse pieces in general to be from 
seven farthings to 2^, and and this they said was in general 
one half-penny dearer than the same sort of pieces had usually been 
sold in the month of March.^^ But even this high price is still a 
good deal cheaper than what we can well suppose the ordinary re- 
tail price to have been in the time of prince Henry. 

During the twelve first years of the last century, the average 
price of the best wheat at the Windsor market was i^. i8j. the 
quarter of nine Winchester bushels. 

But in the twelve years preceding 1764, including that year, the 
average price of the same measure of the best wheat at the same 
market was 2I is. 

In the twelve first years of the last century, therefore, wheat ap- 
pears to have been a good deal cheaper, and butcher’s-meat a good 
deal dearer, than in the twelve years preceding 1764, including that 
year. 

In all great countries the greater part of the cultivated lands are 
employed in producing either food for men or food for cattle. The 
rent and profit of these regulate the rent and profit of all other cul- 
tivated land. If any particular produce afforded less, the land 
would soon be turned into corn or pasture; and if any afforded 
more, some part of the lands in corn or pasture would soon be 
turned to that produce. 

Those productions, indeed, which require either a greater orig- 
inal expence of improvement, ox^a, greater annual expence of culti- 
vation, in order to fit the land for them, appear commonly to af- 
ford, the one a greater rent, the other a greater profit than corn or 
pasture. This superiority, however, will seldom be found to amount 
to more than a reasonable interest or compensation for this superior 
expence. 

In a hop garden, a fruit garden, a kitchen garden, both the rent 
of the landlord, and the profit of the farmer, are generally greater 
than in a corn or grass field. But to bring the ground into this con- 
dition requires more expence. Hence a greater rent becomes due to 
the landlord. It requires too a more attentive and skilful manage- 
ment. Hence a greater profit becomes due to the farmer. The crop 
too, at least in the hop and fruit garden, is more precarious. Its 

^Report from the Committee, paragraph 3 almost verbatim. The Commit- 
tee resolved that the high price of provisions of late has been occasioned 
partly by circumstances peculiar to the season and the year, and partly by the 
defect of the laws in force for convicting and punishing all persons con- 
cerned in forestalling cattle in their passage to market.” 

“These prices are deduced from the tables at the end of the chapter. 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^53 

price, therefore, besides compensating all occasional losses, must 
afford something like the profit of insurance^^ The circumstances 
of gardeners, generally mean, and always moderate, may satisfy us 
that their great ingenuity is not commonly over-recompenced. Their 
delightful art is practised by so many rich people for amusement, 
that little advantage is to be made by those who practise it for 
profit; because the persons who should naturally be their best 
customers, supply themselves with all their most precious produc- 
tions. 

The advantage which the landlord derives from such improve- kitchen- 
ments seems at no time to have been greater than what was suffi- gardens, 
cient to compensate the original expence of making them. In the an- 
cient husbandry, after the vineyard, a well-watered kitchen garden 
seems to have been the part of the farm which was supposed to 
yield the most valuable produce. But Democritus, who wrote upon 
husbandry about two thousand years ago, and who was regarded by 
the ancients as one of the fathers of the art, thought they did not act 
wisely who enclosed a kitchen garden. The profit, he said, would not 
compensate the expence of a stone wall; and bricks (he meant, I 
suppose, bricks baked in the sun) mouldered with the rain, and the 
winter storm, and required continual repairs. Columella, who re- 
ports this judgment of Democritus, does not controvert it, but pro- 
poses a very frugal method of enclosing with a hedge of brambles 
and briars, which, he says, he had found by experience to be both a 
lasting and an impenetrable fence; but which, it seems, was not 
commonly known in the time of Democritus. Palladius adopts the 
opinion of Columella, which had before been recommended by Var- 
In the judgment of those ancient improvers, the produce of a 
kitchen garden had, it seems, been little more than sufficient to pay 
the extraordinary culture and the expence of watering; for in coun- 
tries so near the sun, it was thought proper, in those times as in the 
present, to have the command of a stream of water, which could be 
conducted to every bed in the garden. Through the greater part of 
Europe, a kitchen garden is not at present supposed to deserve a 
better enclosure than that recommended by Columella. In Great 
Britain, and some other northern countries, the finer fruits cannot 

“Only if the extra risk deters people from entering the business, and ac- 
cording to pp. no, III above it would not. 

Ed. I reads “thorns.” 

“ Columella, De re rustica, xi., 3, but the recommendation of the fence is 
“Et haec quidem claudendi horti ratio maxime est antiquis probata.” 

“ Gesnerus’ edition of Columella in Scriptores rei rusticae in Adam Smith’s 
library (see Sonar’s Catalogue, s.v. Gesnerus), commenting on the passage re- 
ferred to above, quotes the opinions of Varro, De re rustica, i., 14, and Pal- 
ladius, De re rustica, i., 34. 



154 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

be brought to perfection but by the assistance of a wall. Their price, 
therefore, in such countries, must be sufficient to pay the expence 
of building and maintaining what they cannot be had without. The 
fruit-wall frequently surrounds the kitchen garden, which thus en- 
joys the benefit of an enclosure which its own produce could seldom 
pay for. 

and vine- That the vineyard, when properly planted and brought to perf ec- 

yards. tion, was the most valuable part of the farm, seems to have been an 
undoubted maxim in the ancient agriculture, as it is in the modern 
through all the wine countries. But whether it was advantageous to 
plant a new vineyard, was a matter of dispute among the ancient 
Italian husbandmen, as we learn from Columella. He decides, like a 
true lover of all curious cultivation, in favour of the vineyard, and 
endeavours to show, by a comparison of the profit and expence, that 
it was a most advantageous improvement.^'^ Such comparisons, how- 
ever, between the profit and expence of new projects, are commonly 
very fallacious; and in nothing more so than in agriculture. Had the 
gain actually made by such plantations been commonly as great as 
he imagined it might have been, there could have been no dispute 
about it. The same point is frequently at this day a matter of con- 
troversy in the wine countries. Their writers on agriculture, indeed, 
the lovers and promoters of high cultivation, seem generally dis- 
posed to decide with Columella in favour of the vineyard. In France 
the anxiety of the proprietors of the old vineyards to prevent the 
planting of any new ones, seems to favour their opinion, and to indi- 
cate a consciousness in those who must have the experience, that 
this species of cultivation is at present in that country more profit- 
able than any other. It seems at the same time, however, to indicate 
another opinion, that this superior profit can last no longer than the 
laws which at present restrain the free cultivation of the vine. In 
1731, they obtained an order of council, prohibiting both the plant- 
ing of new vineyards, and the renewal of those old ones, of which the 
cultivation had been interrupted for two years, without a particular 
permission from the king, to be granted only in consequence of an 
information from the intendant of the province, certifying that he 
had examined the land, and that it was incapable of any other cul- 
ture. The pretence of this order was the scarcity of corn and pasture, 
and the super-abundance of wine. But had this super-abundance 
been real, it would, without any order of council, have effectually 
prevented the plantation of new vineyards, by reducing the profits 
of this species of cultivation below their natural proportion to those 
of corn and pasture. With regard to the supposed scarcity of corn 

re rmtica, iu., 3. 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^55 

occasioned by the multiplication of vineyards, corn is nowhere in 
France more carefully cultivated than in the wine provinces, where 
the land is fit for producing it; as in Burgundy, Guienne, and the 
Upper Languedoc. The numerous hands employed in the one species 
of cultivation necessarily encourage the other, by affording a ready 
market for its produce. To diminish the number of those who are 
capable of paying for it, is surely a most unpromising expedient for 
encouraging the cultivation of corn. It is like the policy which 
would promote agriculture by discouraging manufactures. 

The rent and profit of those productions, therefore, which require 
either a greater original expence of improvement in order to fit the 
land for them, or a greater annual expence of cultivation, though 
often much superior to those of corn and pasture, yet when they do 
no more than compensate such extraordinary expence, are in reality 
regulated by the rent and profit of those common crops. 

It sometimes happens, indeed, that the quantity of land which Land fit- 
can be fitted for some particular produce, is too small to supply the 
effectual demand. The whole produce can be disposed of to those larpro- 
who are willing to give somewhat more than what is sufficient to ducemay 
pay the whole rent, wages and profit necessary for raising and bring- 
ing it to market, ancording to their natural rates, or according to oly, 
the rates at which they are paid in the greater part of other culti- 
vated land. The surplus part of the price which remains after de- 
fraying the whole expence of improvement and cultivation may 
commonly, in this case, and in this case only, bear no regular pro- 
portion to the like surplus in corn or pasture, but may exceed it in 
almost any degree ; and the greater part of this excess naturally goes 
to the rent of the landlord. , 

SUCil 3fS 

The usual and natural proportion, for example, between the rent that 
and profit of wine and those of corn and pasture, must be under- which 
stood to take place only with regard to those vineyards which pro- 
duce nothing but good common wine, such as can be raised almost particular 
any-where, upon any light, gravelly, or sandy soil, and which has flavour, 
nothing to recommend it but its strength and wholesomeness. It is 
with such vineyards only that common land of the country can be 
brought into competition; for with those of a peculiar qudity it is 
evident .that it cannot. 

The vine is more affected by the difference of soils than any other 
fruit tree. From some it derives a flavour which no culture or man- 
agement can equal, it is supposed, upon any other. This flavour, 
real or imaginary, is sometimes peculiar to the produce of a few 
vineyards; sometimes it extends through the greater part of a small 
district, and sometimes through a considerable part of a large prov- 



or the 
West In- 
dian sugar 
colonies, 


156 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


ince. The whole quantity of such wines that is brought to market 
falls short of the effectual demand, or the demand of those who 
would be willing to pay the whole rent, profit and wages necessary 
for preparing and bringing them thither, according to the ordinary 
rate, or according to the rate at which they are paid in common 
vineyards. The whole quantity, therefore, can be disposed of to 
those who are willing to pay more, which necessarily raises the 
price above that of common wine. The difference is greater or less, 
according as the fashionableness and scarcity of the wine render 
the competition of the buyers more or less eager. Whatever it be, 
the greater part of it goes to the rent of the landlord. For though 
such vineyards are in general more carefully cultivated than most 
others, the high price of the wine seems to be, not so much the effect, 
as the cause of this careful cultivation. In so valuable a produce the 
loss occasioned by negligence is so great as to force even the most 
careless to attention. A small part of this high price, therefore, is 
sufficient to pay the wages of the extraordinary labour bestowed up- 
on their cultivation, and the profits of the extraordinary stock which 
puts that labour into motion. 

The sugar colonies possessed by the European nations in the West 
Indies, may be compared to those precious vineyards. Their whole 
produce falls short of the effectual demand of Europe, and can be 
disposed of to those who are willing to give more than what is suf- 
ficient to pay the whole rent, profit and wages necessary for pre- 
paring and bringing it to market, according to the rate at which they 
are commonly paid by any other produce. In Cochin-china the finest 
white sugar commonly sells for three piastres the quintal, about 
thirteen shillings and sixpence of our money, as we are told by Mr. 
Poivre,^^ a very careful observer of the agriculture of that country. 
What is there called the quintal weighs from a hundred and fifty to 
two hundred Paris pounds, or a hundred and seventy-five Paris 
pounds at a medium,^^’ which reduces the price of the hundred 
weight English to about eight shillings sterling, not a fourth part of 
what is commonly paid for the brown or muskavada sugars im- 
ported from our colonies, and not a sixth part of what is paid for the 
finest white sugar. The greater part of the cultivated lands in Co- 


“ Ed. I reads “their.” 

“Voyages d’un Philosophe [ou observations sur les moeurs et les arts des 
pears first h^ed^2T ^ ^fnirique, 1768, pp. 92, 93. The note ap- 

“ The French original says the Cochin-China quintal “equivaut a i<o L. 200 
de nos hvp, poids de marc ” which cannot possibly bear the meanine as- 
cnbed to it in the text. Probably the ijo L. ^e poLds equal S To! fte 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^57 

chin-china are employed in producing corn and rice, the food of the 
great body of the people. The respective prices of corn, rice, and su- 
gar, are there probably in the natural proportion, or in that which 
naturally takes place in the different crops of the greater part of 
cultivated land, and which recompences the landlord and farmer, as 
nearly as can be computed, according to what is usually the original 
expence of improvement and the annual expence of cultivation. But 
in our sugar colonies the price of sugar bears no such proportion to 
that of the produce of a rice or corn field either in Europe or in 
America. It is commonly said, that a sugar planter expects that the 
rum and the molasses should defray the whole expence of his cul- 
tivation, and that his sugar should be all clear profit. If this be true, 
for I pretend not to affirm it, it is as if a corn farmer expected to de- 
fray the expence of his cultivation with the chaff and the straw, and 
that the grain should be all clear profit. We see frequently societies 
of merchants in London and other trading towns, purchase waste 
lands in our sugar colonies, which they expect to improve and culti- 
vate with profit by means of factors and agents; notwithstanding 
the great distance and the uncertain returns, from the defective ad- 
ministration of justice in those countries. Nobody will attempt to 
improve and cultivate in the same manner the most fertile lands of 
Scotland, Ireland, or the corn provinces of North America, though 
from the more exact administration of justice in these countries, 
more regular returns might be expected. 

In Virginia and Maryland the cultivation of tobacco is preferred, and in a 
as more profitable, to that of corn. Tobacco might be cultivated with ffie 
advantage through the greater part of Europe; but in almost every tobacco 
part of Europe it has become a principal subject of taxation, and to 
collect a tax from every different farm in the country where this Virginia 
plant might happen to be cultivated, would be more difficult, it has and 

been supposed, than to levy one upon its importation at the custom- ^^d^' 

house. The cultivation of tobacco has upon this account been most 
absurdly prohibited through the greater part of Europe,-^ which 

^ Tobacco growing in England, Ireland, and the Channel Islands was pro- 
hibited by 12 Car. II., c. 34, the preamble of which alleges that the lords and 
commons have considered “of how great concern and importance it is that 
the colonies and plantations of this kingdom in America be defended, main- 
tained and kept up, and that all due and possible encouragement be given 
unto them, and that not only in regard great and considerable dominions and 
countries have been thereby gained and added to the imperial crown of this 
realm, but for that the strength and welfare of this kingdom do very much 
depend upon them in regard of the employment of a very considerable part 
of its shipping and seamen, and of the vent of very great quantities of its 
native commodities and manufactures as also of its supply with several con- 
siderable commodities which it was wont formerly to have only from for- 
eigners and at far dearer rates, and forasmuch as tobacco is one of the main 



ISS the wealth of nations 

necessarily gives a sort of monopoly to the countries where it is al- 
lowed; and as Virginia and Maryland produce the greatest quantity 
of it, they share largely, though with some competitors, in the ad- 
vantage of this monopoly. The cultivation of tobacco, however, 
seems not to be so advantageous as that of sugar. I have never even 
heard of any tobacco plantation that was improved and cultivated 
by the capital of merchants who resided in Great Britain, and our 
tobacco colonies send us home no such wealthy planters as we see 
frequently arrive from our sugar islands. Though from the prefer- 
ence given in those colonies to the cultivation of tobacco above that 
of corn, it would appear that the effectual demand of Europe for to- 
bacco is not completely supplied, it probably is more nearly so than 
that for sugar: And though the present price of tobacco is probably 
more than sufficient to pay the whole rent, wages and profit neces- 
sary for preparing and bringing it to market, according to the rate 
at which they are commonly paid in corn land; it must not be so 
much more as the present price of sugar. Our tobacco planters, ac- 
cordingly, have shewn the same fear of the super-abundance of to- 
bacco, which the proprietors of the old vineyards in France have of 
the super-abundance of wine. By act of assembly they have re- 
strained its cultivation to six thousand plants, supposed to yield a 
thousand weight of tobacco, for every negro between sixteen and 
sixty years of age.^^ Such a negro, over and above this quantity of 
tobacco, can manage, they reckon, four acres of Indian corn.^^ To 
prevent the market from being overstocked too, they have some- 
times, in plentiful years, we are told by Dr. Douglas,^^ (I suspect 
he has been ill informed) burnt a certain quantity of tobacco for 
every negro, in the same manner as the Dutch are said to do of 
spices.^® If such violent methods are necessary to keep up the pres- 

products of several of those plantations and upon which their welfare and 
subsistence and the navigation of this kingdom and vent of its commodities 
thither do much depend; And in regard it is found by experience that the to- 
baccos planted in these parts are not so good and wholesome for the takers 
thereof, and that by the planting thereof Your Majesty is deprived of a con- 
siderable part of your revenue.” The prohibition was extended to Scotland 
by 2 2 Geo. III., c. 73. 

William Douglass, M.D., A Summary, Historical and Political, of the 
First Planting, Progressive Improvements and Present State of the British 
Settlements in North America, 1760, vol. ii., pp. 359, 360 and 373. 

^Ibid,, p. 374, but the phrase is “an industrious man” not “such a negro 

Douglas’s Summary, vol. ii., p. 372, 373. This note appears first in ed 2. 
In the text of ed. i. the name is spelt “Douglass.” 

This saying about the Dutch and spices is repeated below, p. 491, 600. 
Douglass, yol. ii., p. 372, in a note to the statement that Virginia and Mary- 
land occasionally produce more than they can sell to advantage, which imme- 
diately precedes his account of the occasional burning of tobacco, says: “This 
IS sometimes the case with the Dutch East India spices and the West India 
sugars.” 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^59 

ent price of tobacco, the superior advantage of its culture over that 
of corn, if it still has any, will not probably be of long continuance. 

It is in this manner that the rent of the cultivated land, of which 
the produce is human food, regulates the rent of the greater part of 
other cultivated land. No particular produce can long afford less; 
because the land would immediately be turned to another use: And 
if any particular produce commonly affords more, it is because the 
quantity of land which can be fitted for it is too small to supply the 
effectual demand. 

In Europe corn is the principal produce of land which serves im- 
mediately for human food. Except in particular situations, there- 
fore, the rent of corn land regulates in Europe that of all other cul- 
tivated land. Britain need envy neither the vineyards of France nor 
the olive plantations of Italy. Except in particular situations, the 
value of these is regulated by that of com, in which the fertility of 
Britain is not much inferior to that of either of those two countries. 

If in any country the common and favourite vegetable food of the 
people should be drawn from a plant of which the most common 
land, with the same or nearly the same culture, produced a much 
greater quantity than the most fertile does of corn, the rent of the 
landlord, or the surplus quantity of food which would remain to 
him, after paying the labour and replacing the stock of the farmer 
together with its ordinary profits, would necessarily be much 
greater. Whatever was the rate at which labour was commonly 
maintained in that country, this greater surplus could always main- 
tain a greater quantity of it, and consequently enable the landlord 
to purchase or command a greater quantity of it. The real value of 
his rent, his real power and authority, his command of the neces- 
saries and conveniencies of life with which the labour of other peo- 
ple could supply him, would necessarily be much greater. 

A rice field produces a much greater quantity of food than the 
most fertile corn field. Two crops in the year from thirty to sixty 
bushels each, are said to be the ordinary produce of an acre. Though 
its cultivation, therefore, requires more labour, a much greater sur- 
plus remains after maintaining all that labour. In those rice coun- 
tries, therefore, where rice is the common and favourite vegetable 
food of the people, and where the cultivators are chiefly maintained 
Ivith it, a greater share of this greater surplus should belong to the 
landlord than in corn countries. In Carolina, where the planters, as 
in other British colonies, are generally both farmers and landlords, 
and where rent consequently is confounded with profit, the cultiva- 
tion of rice is found to be more profitable than that of corn, though 
their fields produce only one crop in the year, and though, from the 


So the 
rent of 
cultivated 
land pro- 
ducing 
food 
regu- 
lates that 
of most of 
the rest, 

and in 
Europe 
the rent 
of corn 
land regu* 
altes that 
of other 
cultivated 
land pro- 
ducing 
food. 

If the 
common 
food was 
such as to 
produce 
a greater 
surplus, 
rent 

would be 
higher: 


for ex- 
ample, 
rice, 



i6o 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


or pota- 
toes. 


Wheat is 
probably 
a better 
food than 
oats, 


prevalence of the customs of Europe, rice is not there the common 
and favourite vegetable food of the people. 

A good rice field is a bog at all seasons, and at one season a bog 
covered with water. It is unfit either for corn, or pasture, or vine- 
yard, or, indeed, for any other vegetable produce that is very useful 
to men: And the lands which are fit for those purposes, are not fit 
for rice. Even in the rice countries, therefore, the rent of rice lands 
cannot regulate the rent of the other cultivated land which can 
never be turned to that produce. 

The food produced by a field of potatoes is not inferior in quan- 
tity to that produced by a field of rice, and much superior to what is 
produced by a field of wheat. Twelve thousand weight of potatoes 
from an acre of land is not a greater produce than two thousand 
weight of wheat. The food or solid nourishment, indeed, which can 
be drawn from each of those two plants, is not altogether in pro- 
portion to their weight, on account of the watery nature of potatoes. 
Allowing, however, half the weight of this root to go to water, a 
very large allowance, such an acre of potatoes will still produce six 
thousand weight of solid nourishment, three times the quantity pro- 
duced by the acre of wheat. An acre of potatoes is cultivated with 
less expence than an acre of wheat; the fallow, which generally pre- 
cedes the sowing of wheat, more than compensating the hoeing and 
other extraordinary culture which is always given to potatoes. 
Should this root ever become in any part of Europe, like rice in 
some rice countries, the common and favourite vegetable food of 
the people, so as to occupy the same proportion of the lands in til- 
lage which wheat and other sorts of grain for human food do at 
present, the same quantity of cultivated land would maintain a 
much greater number of people, and the labourers being generally 
fed with potatoes, a greater surplus would remain after replacing 
all the stock and maintaining all the labour employed in cultivation. 
A greater share of this surplus too.would belong to the landlord. 

4 Population would increase, and rents would rise much beyond what 
they are at present. 

The land which is fit for potatoes, is fit for almost every other 
useful vegetable. If they occupied the same proportion of culti- 
vated land which corn does at present, they would regulate, in the 
same manner, the rent of the greater part of other cultivated land. 

In some parts of Lancashire it is pretended, I have been told, that 
bread of oatmeal is a heartier food for labouring people than 
wheaten bread, and I have frequently heard the same doctrine held 
in Scotland. I am, however, somewhat doubtful of the truth of it. 
The common people in Scotland, who are fed with oatmeal, are in 



RENT OE LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD 

general neither so strong nor so handsome as the same rank of peo- 
ple in England, who are fed with wheaten bread. They neither work 
so well, nor look so well; and as there is not the same difference be- 
tween the people of fashion in the two countries, experience would 
seem to show, that the food of the common people in Scotland is 
not so suitable to the human constitution as that of their neighbours 
of the same rank in England.^® But it seems to be otherwise with 
potatoes. The chairmen, porters, and coal-heavers in London, and 
those unfortunate women who live by prostitution, the strongest 
men and the most beautiful women perhaps in the British domin- 
ions, are said to be, the greater part of them, from the lowest rank 
of people in Ireland, who are generally fed with this root. No food 
can afford a more decisive proof of its nourishing quality, or of its 
being peculiarly suitable to the health of the human constitution. 

It is difficult to preserve potatoes through the year, and impos- 
sible to store them like corn, for two or three years together. The 
fear of not being able to sell them before they rot, discourages their 
cultivation, and is, perhaps, the chief obstacle to their ever becom- 
ing in any great country, like bread, the principal vegetable food of 
all the different ranks of the people. 


Part II 

Of the Produce of Land which sometimes does, and sometimes does 
not, afford Rent 

Human food seems to be the only produce of land which always 
and necessarily affords some rent to the landlord. Other sorts of 
produce sometimes may and sometimes may not, according to dif- 
ferent circumstances. 

After food, cloathing and lodging are the two great wants of man- 
kind. 

Land in its original rude state can afford the materials of cloath- 
ing and lodging to a much greater number of people than it can feed. 
In its improved state it can sometimes feed a greater number of peo- 
ple than it can supply with those materials; at least in the way in 
which they require them, and are willing to pay for them. In the one 
state, therefore, there is always a super-abundance of those ma- 
terials, which are frequently, upon that account, of little or no value. 
In the other there is often a scarcity, which necessarily augments 


but not 
than po- 
tatoes. 


Potatoes, 
however, 
are per- 
ishable. 


The ma- 
terials of 
cloathing 
and 

lodging, 
at first 
super- 
abundant, 
come in 
time to 
afford a 
rent. 


“ The inferiority of oatmeal has already been asserted above, pp. 7S> 76 . 



For ex- 
ample, 
hides and 
wool, 


stone and 
timber. 


162 the wealth of nations 

their value. In the one state a great part of them is thrown away as 
useless, and the price of what is used is considered as equal only to 
the labour and expence of fitting it for use, and can, therefore, afford 
no rent to the landlord. In the other they are all made use of, and 
there is frequently a demand for more than can be had. Somebody 
is always willing to give more for every part of them than what is 
sufficient to pay the expence of bringing them to market. Their 
price, therefore, can always afford some rent to the landlord. 

The skins of the larger animals were the original materials of 
cloathing. Among nations of hunters and shepherds, therefore, 
whose food consists chiefly in the flesh of those animals, every man, 
by providing himself with food, provides himself with the materials 
of more cloathing than he can wear. If there was no foreign com- 
merce, the greater part of them would be thrown away as things of 
no value. This was probably the case among the hunting nations of 
North America, before their country was discovered by the Euro- 
peans, with whom they now exchange their surplus peltry, for 
blankets, fire-arms, and brandy, which gives it some value. In the 
present commercial state of the known world, the most barbarous 
nations, I believe, among whom land property is established, have 
some foreign commerce of this kind, and find among their wealthier 
neighbours such a demand for all the materials of cloathing, which 
their land produces, and which can neither be wrought up nor con- 
consumed at home, as raises their price above what it costs to send 
them to those wealthier neighbours.^® It affords, therefore, some 
rent to the landlord. When the greater part of the highland cattle 
were consumed on their own hills, the exportation of their hides 
made the most considerable article of the commerce of that coun- 
try, and what they were exchanged for afforded some addition to 
the rent of the highland estates.^® The wool of England, which in 
old times could neither be consumed nor wrought up at home, found 
a market in the then wealthier and more industrious country of 
Flanders, and its price afforded something to the rent of the land 
which produced it. In countries not better cultivated than England 
was then, or than the highlands of Scotland are now, and which had 
no foreign commerce, the materials of cloathing would evidently bf 
so super-abundant, that a great part of them would be thrown 
away as useless, and no part could afford any rent to the landlord. 

The materials of lodging cannot always be transported to so great 
a distance as those of cloathing, and do not so readily become an 

This “always” is qualified almost to the extent of contradiction on d i6< 
below. 

•“ Ed. I reads “thither.” "Above, p. 149, and below, p. 220. 



RENT OE LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^63 

object of foreign commerce. When they are super-abundant in the 
country which produces them, it frequently happens, even in the 
present commercial state of the world, that they are of no value to 
the landlord. A good stone quarry in the neighbourhood of London 
would afford a considerable rent. In many parts of Scotland and 
Wales it affords none. Barren timber for building is of great value 
in a populous and well-cultivated country, and the land which pro- 
duces it affords a considerable rent. But in many parts of North 
America the landlord would be much obliged to any body who 
would carry away the greater part of his large trees. In some parts 
of the highlands of Scotland the bark is the only part of the wood 
which, for want of roads and water-carriage, can be sent to mar- 
ket. The timber is left to rot upon the ground. When the materials 
of lodging are so super-abundant, the part made use of is worth 
only the labour and expence of fitting it for that use. It affords no 
rent to the landlord, who generally grants the use of it to whoever 
takes the trouble of asking it. The demand of wealthier nations, 
however, sometimes enables him to get a rent for it. The paving of 
the streets of London has enabled the owners of some barren rocks 
on the coast of Scotland to draw a rent from what never afforded 
any before. The woods of Norway and of the coasts of the Baltic, 
find a market in many parts of Great Britain which they could not 
find at home, and thereby afford some rent to their proprietors. 

Countries are populous, not in proportion to the number of peo- 
ple whom their produce can cloath and lodge, but in proportion to 
that of those whom it can feed. When food is provided, it is easy to 
find the necessary cloathing and lodging. But though these are at 
hand, it may often be difficult to find food. In some parts even of 
the British dominions what is called A House, may be built by one 
day’s labour of one man. The simplest species of cloathing, the 
skins of animals, require somewhat more labour to dress and pre- 
pare them for use. They do not, however, require a great deal. 
Among savage and barbarous nations, a hundredth or little more 
than a hundredth part of the labour of the whole year, will be suffi- 
cient to provide them with such cloathing and lodging as satisfy 
the greater part of the people. All the other ninety-nine parts are 
frequently no more than enough to provide them with food. 

But when by the improvement and cultivation of land the labour 
of one family can provide food for two, the labour of half the so- 
ciety becomes sufficient to provide food for the whole. The other 
half, therefore, or at least the greater part of them, can be employed 
in providing other things, or in satisfying the other wants and fan- 
cies of mankind. Cloathing and lodging, household furniture, and 


Popula- 
tion de- 
pends on 
food; 


so the de- 
mand for 
the mate- 
rials of 
clothing 
and lodg- 
ing is in- 
creased by 



greater 

ease 

of obtain- 
ing food, 


which 
thus 
makes 
them af- 
ford rent. 


They do 
not, how- 
ever, even 
then al- 
ways af- 
ford rent: 


164 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

what is called Equipage, are the principal objects of the greater part 
of those wants and fancies. The rich man consumes no more food 
than his poor neighbour. In quality it may be very different, and to 
select and prepare it may require more labour and art; but in quan- 
tity it is very nearly the same. But compare the spacious palace and 
great wardrobe of the one, with the hovel and the few rags of the 
other, and you will be sensible that the difference between their 
cloathing, lodging, and household furniture, is almost as great in 
quantity as it is in quality. The desire of food is limited in every 
man by the narrow capacity of the human stomach; but the desire 
of the conveniencies and ornaments of building, dress, equipage, 
and household furniture, seems to have no limit or certain boundary. 
Those, therefore, who have the command of more food than they 
themselves can consume, are always willing to exchange the surplus, 
or, what is the same thing, the price of it, for gratifications of this 
other kind. What is over and above satisfying the limited desire, is 
given for the amusement of those desires which cannot be satisfied, 
but seem to be altogether endless. The poor, in order to obtain food, 
exert themselves to gratify those fancies of the rich, and to obtain 
it more certainly, they vie with one another in the cheapness and 
perfection of their work. The number of workmen increases with the 
increasing quantity of food, or with the growing improvement and 
cultivation of the lands; and as the nature of their business admits 
of the utmost subdivisions of labour, the quantity of materials 
which they can work up, increases in a much greater proportion 
than their numbers. Hence arises a demand for every sort of ma- 
terial which human invention can employ, either usefully or orna- 
mentally, in building, dress, equipage, or household furniture; for 
the fossils and minerals contamed in the bowels of the earth, the 
precious metals, and the precious stones. 

Food is in this manner, not only the original source of rent, but 
every other part of the produce of land which afterwards affords 
rent, derives that part of its value from the improvement of the 
powers of labour in producing food by means of the improvement 
and cultivation of land.®® 

Those other parts of the produce of land, however, which after- 
wards afford rent, do not afford it always. Even in improved and 
cultivated countries, the demand for them is not always such as to 
afford a greater price than what is sufficient to pay the labour, and 
replace, together with its ordinary profits, the stock which must be 


Parapphs appear to be based on the disser- 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD 

employed in bringing them to market. Whether it is or is not such, 
depends upon different circumstances. 

Whether a coal-mine, for example, can afford any rent, depends 
partly upon its fertility, and partly upon its situation. 

A mine of any kind may be said to be either fertile or barren, ac- 
cording as the quantity of mineral which can be brought from it 
by a certain quantity of labour, is greater or less than what can be 
brought by an equal quantity from the greater part of other mines 
of the same kind. 

Some coal-mines advantageously situated, cannot be wrought on 
account of their barrenness. The produce does not pay the expence. 
They can afford neither profit nor rent. 

There are ^ome of which the produce is barely sufficient to pay 
the labour,®^ and replace, together with its ordinary profits, the 
stock employed in working them. They afford some profit to the 
undertaker of the work, but no rent to the landlord. They can be 
wrought advantageously by nobody but the landlord, who being 
himself undertaker of the work, gets the ordinary profit of the 
capital which he employs in it. Many coal-mines in Scotland are 
wrought in this manner, and can be wrought in no other. The land- 
lord will allow nobody else to work them without paying some rent, 
and nobody can afford to pay any. 

Other coal-mines in the same country sufficiently fertile, cannot 
be wrought on account of their situation. A quantity of mineral suf- 
ficient to defray the expence of working, could be brought from the 
mine by the ordinary, or even less than the ordinary quantity of 
labour: But in an inland country, thinly inhabited, and without 
either good roads or water-carriage, this quantity could not be sold. 

Coals are a less agreeable fewel than wood: they are said too to 
be less wholesome. The expence of coals, therefore, at the place 
where they are consumed, must generally be somewhat less than 
that of wood. 

The price of wood again varies with the state of agriculture, 
nearly in the same manner, and exactly for the same reason, as the 
price of cattle. In its rude beginnings the greater part of every 
country is covered with wood, which is then a mere incumbrance of 
no value to the landlord, who would glady give it to any body for 
the cutting. As agriculture advances, the woods are partly cleared 
by the progress of tillage, and partly go to decay in consequence of 
the increased number of cattle. These, though they do not increase 
in the same proportion as corn, which is altogether the acquisition 
of human industry, yet multiply under the care and protection of 


for ex- 
ample, 
some 
coal- 
mines 
are too 
barren to 
afford 
rent, 


ortoodis- 

advanta- 

geously 

situated. 


The price 
of coal is 
kept 
down by 
that of 
wood, 

which 
varies 
with the 
state of 
agricul- 
ture. 


“ Misprinted ^‘labourer” m ed. S. 



But in the 
coal coun- 
tries coal 
is every- 
where 
much be* 
low this 
'rice. 


XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

men ; who store up in the season of plenty what may maintain them 
in that of scarcity, who through the whole year furnish them with 
a greater quantity of food than uncultivated nature provides for 
them, and who by destroying and extirpating their enemies, secure 
them in the free enjoyment of all that she provides. Numerous 
herds of cattle, when allowed to wander through the woods, though 
they do not destroy the old trees, hinder any young ones from com- 
ing up, so that in the course of a century or two the whole forest 
goes to ruin. The scarcity of wood then raises its price. It affords a 
good rent, and the landlord sometimes finds that he can scarce em- 
ploy his best lands more advantageously than in growing barren 
timber, of which the greatness of the profit often compensates the 
lateness of the returns. This seems in the present times to be nearly 
the state of things in several parts of Great Britain, where the profit 
of planting is found to be equal to that of either corn or pasture. 
The advantage which the landlord derives from planting, can no- 
where exceed, at least for any considerable time, the rent which 
these could afford him; and in an inland country which is highly 
cultivated, it will frequently not fall much short of this rent. Upon 
the sea-coast of a well-improved country, indeed, if coals can con- 
veniently be had for fewel,^^ it may sometimes be cheaper to bring 
barren timber for building from less cultivated foreign countries, 
than to raise it at home. In the new town of Edinburgh, built with- 
in these few years,^^ there is not, perhaps, a single stick of Scotch 
timber. 

Whatever may be the price of wood, if that of coals is such that 
the expence of a coal-fire is nearly equal to that of a wood one, we 
may be assured, that at that place, and in these circumstances, the 
price of coals is as high as it can be. It seems to be so in some of 
the inland parts of England, particularly in Oxfordshire, where it 
is usual, even in the fires of the common people, to mix coals and 
wood together, and where the difference in the expence of those 
two sorts of fewel cannot, therefore, be very great. 

Coals, in the coal countries, are every-where much below this 
highest price. If they were not, they could not bear the expence of 
a distant carriage, either by land or by water. A small quantity 
only could be sold, and the coal masters and coal proprietors find it 
more for their interest to sell a great quantity at a price somewhat 

Ed. I reads “if it can conveniently get coals for fewel.” 

®®The North Bridge was only made passable in 1772: in 1778 the buildings 
along Princes Street had run to a considerable length, and St. Andrew’s Square 
and the streets connected with it were almost complete. A plan of that date 
shows the whole block between Queen Street and Princes Street (Arnot, His- 
tory of Edinburgh, 1779, pp. 333, 31$, 31S, 319). 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^^7 

above the lowest, than a small quantity at the highest. The most 
fertile coal-mine too, regulates the price of coals at all the other 
mines in its neighbourhood.^^ Both the proprietor and the under- 
taker of the work find, the one that he can get a greater rent, the 
other that he can get a greater profit, by somewhat underselling all 
their neighbours. Their neighbours are soon obliged to sell at the 
same price, though they cannot so well af ord it, and though it al- 
ways diminishes, and sometimes takes away altogether both their 
rent and their profit. Some works are abandoned altogether; others 
can afford no rent, and can be wrought only by the proprietor. 

The lowest price at which coals can be sold for any considerable 
time, is, like th4t of all other commodities, the price which is 
barely sufficient to replace, together with its ordinary profits, the 
stock which must be employed in bringing them to market. At a 
coal-mine for which the landlord can get no rent, but which he 
must either work himself or let it alone altogether, the price of 
coals must generally be nearly about this price. 

Rent, even where coals afford one, has generally a smaller share 
in their price than in that of most other parts of the rude produce 
of land. The rent of an estate above ground, commonly amounts to 
what is supposed to be a third of the gross produce; and it is gen- 
erally a rent certain and independent of the occasional variations 
in the crop. In coal-mines a fifth of the gross produce is a very 
great rent; a tenth the common rent, and it is seldom a rent certain, 
but depends upon the occasional variations in the produce. These 
are so great, that in a country where thirty years purchase is con- 
sidered as a moderate price for the property for a landed estate, ten 
years purchase is regarded as a good price for that of a coal-mine. 

The value of a coal-mine to the proprietor frequently depends 
as much upon its situation as upon its fertility. That of a metallic 
mine depends more upon its fertility, and less upon its situation. 
The coarse, and stiU more the precious metals, when separated from 
the ore, are so valuable that they can generally bear the expence of 
a very long land, and of the most distant sea carriage. Their market 
is not confined to the countries in the neighbourhood of the mine, 
but extends to the whole world. The copper of Japan makes an ar- 
ticle of commerce in Europe; the iron of Spain in that of Chili and 

Buchanan (ed. of Wealth of Nations, vol. i , p. 279), commenting on this 
passage, remarks judiciously; “It is not by the produce of one coal mine, 
however fertile, but by the joint produce of all the coal mines that can be 
worked, that the price of coals is fixed. A certain quantity of coals only can 
be consumed at a certain price. If the mines that can be worked pmduce 
more than this quantity the price will fall; if they produce less it will rise.” 

^ Ed. I reads “depends frequently.” 

^ Ed. I reads “article in the commerce of Europe.” 


The low- 
est pos- 
sible price 
is that 
which 
only re- 
places 
stock with 
profits. 

Rent 
forms a 
smaller 
propor- 
tion of 
the price 
of coal 
than of 
that of 
most 

other rude 
produce. 


The situa- 
tion of a 
metallic 
mine is 
less im- 
portant 
than that 
of a coal 
mine, 



metals 
from all 
parts of 
the world 
being 
brought 
into com- 
petition. 


Rent has 
therefore 
a small 
share in 
the price 
of metals. 


Tin and 
lead 

mines pay 
a sixth in 
Cornwall 
and Scot- 
land. 

The silver 
mines of 
Peru for- 


i68 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Peru. The silver of Peru finds its way, not only to Europe, but from 
Europe to China. 

The price of coals in Westmorland or Shropshire can have little 
effect on their price at Newcastle; and their price in the Lionnois 
can have none at all. The productions of such distant coal-mines can 
never be brought into competition with one another. But the pro- 
ductions of the most distant metallic mines frequently may, and in 
fact commonly are. The price, therefore, of the coarse, and still 
more that of the precious metis, at the most fertile mines in the 
world, must necessarily more or less affect their price at every other 
in it. The price of copper in Japan must have some influence 
upon its price at the copper mines in Europe. The price of silver in 
Peru, or the quantity either of labour or of other goods which it 
will purchase there, must have some influence on its price, not only 
at the silver mines of Europe, but at those of China. After the dis- 
covery of the mines of Peru, the silver mines of Europe were, the 
greater part of them, abandoned. The value of silver was so much 
reduced that their produce could no longer pay the expence of work- 
ing them, or replace, with a profit, the food, cloaths, lodging and 
other necessaries which were consumed in that operation. This was 
the case too with the mines of Cuba and St. Domingo, and even 
with the ancient mines of Peru, after the discovery of those of 
Potosi, 

The price of every metal at every mine, therefore, being regu- 
lated in some measure by its price at the most fertile mine in the 
world that is actually wrought, it can at the greater part of mines 
do very little more than pay the expence of working, and can sel- 
dom afford a very high rent to the landlord. Rent, accordingly, 
seems at the greater part of mines to have but a small share in the 
price of the coarse, and a still smaller in that of the precious met- 
als. Labour and profit make up the greater part of both. 

A sixth part of the gross produced may be reckoned the average 
rent of the tin mines of Cornwall, the most fertile that are known 
in the world, as we are told by the Rev. Mr. Borlace, vice-warden 
of the stannaries. Some, he says, afford more, and some do not af- 
ford so much.®^ A sixth part of the gross produce is the rent too of 
several very fertile lead mines in Scotland. 

In the silver mines of Peru, we are told by Frezier and Ulloa, the 
proprietor frequently exacts no other acknowledgment from the un- 
dertaker of the mine, but that he will grind the ore at his mill, pay- 

^ Natural History of Cornwall, by William Borlase, 1758, p. 175, but noth- 
ing is there said as to the landlord sometimes receiving more than one-sixth. 



RENT OE LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD 1^9 

ing him the ordinary multure or price of grinding.^® Till 1736, in- merly 
deed, the tax of the king of Spain amounted to one-fifth of the 
standard silver, which till then might be considered as the real rent 
of the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, the richest which 
have been known in the world. If there had been no tax, this fifth 
would naturally have belonged to the landlord, and many mines 
might have been wrought which could not then be wrought, be- 
cause they could not afford this tax.®^ The tax of the duke of Corn- 
wall upon tin is supposed to amount to more than five per cent, or 
one-twentieth part of the value; and whatever may be his pro- 
portion, it would naturally too belong to the proprietor of the mine, 
if tin was duty free. But if you add one-twentieth to one-sixth, you 
will find that the whole average rent of the tin mines of Cornwall, 
was to the whole average rent of the silver mines of Peru, as thir- and now 

teen to twelve. But the silver mines of Peru are not now able to pay 
even this low rent, and the tax upon silver was, in 1736, reduced 
from one-fifth to one-tenth.*^^ Even this tax upon silver too gives 
more temptation to smuggling than the tax of one-twentieth upon 
tin; and smuggling must be much easier in the precious than in 
the bulky commodity. The tax of the king of Spain accordingly is 
said to be very ill paid, and that of the duke of Cornwall very well. 

Rent, therefore, it is probable, makes a greater part of the price of 
tin at the most fertile tin mines, than it does of silver at the most 
fertile silver mines in the world. After replacing the stock em- 
ployed in working those different mines, together with its ordinary 
profits, the residue which remains to the proprietor, is greater it 
seems in the coarse, than in the precious metal. 

Neither are the profits of the undertakers of silver mines c.om- 

^ “Those who are willing to labour themselves easily obtain of the miner a 
vein to work on; what they get out of it is their own, paying him the I^g’s 
duty and the hire of the mill, which is so considerable that some are satisfied 
with the profit it yields without employing any to work for them in the 
mines.” — ^Frezier, Voyage to the South Sea and along the Coasts of Chili and 
Peru in the Years 1712, 1713 and 1714, with a Postscript by Dr. Edmund HaU 
ley, 1717, p. 109. For Ulloa see below, p. 171, note. ^ ^ 

In place of these two sentences ed. i reads, “The tax of the King of Spam, 
indeed, amounts to one-fifth of the standard silver, which may be considered 
as the real rent of the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, the rich^t 
which are known in the world. If there was no tax, this fifth would naturally 
belong to the landlord, and many mines might be wrought which cannot be 
wrought at present, because they cannot afford this tax.” 

The sum of more than £10,000 paid on £190,954 worth of produce is men- 
tioned by Borlase. The duty was 4s. per cwt— Natural History of Cornwall, 
p. 183. 

^^Ed. I reads “is.” 

‘^The reduction is mentioned again below, pp. 202, 214. Ed. i does not 
contain this sentence, and begins the next with “The high tax upon silver, too, 
gives much greater temptation to smuggling than the low tax upon tin. 



while 
profits are 
small. 


Mining is 
encour- 
aged in 
Peru by 
the inter- 
est of the 
sovereign. 


The gold 
mines of 
Peru now 
pay only a 
twentieth 
in rent. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


monly very great in Peru. The same most respectable and well in- 
formed authors acquaint us, that when any person undertakes to 
work a new mine in Peru, he is universally looked upon as a man 
destined to bankruptcy and ruin, and is upon that account shunned 
and avoided by every body.^^ Mining, it seems, is considered there 
in the same light as here, as a lottery, in which the prizes do not 
compensate the blanks, though the greatness of some tempts many 
adventurers to throw away their fortunes in such unprosperous 
projects. 

As the sovereign, however, derives a considerable part of his rev- 
enue from the produce of silver mines, the law in Peru gives every 
possible encouragement to the discovery and working of new ones. 
Whoever discovers a new mine, is entitled to measure off two hun- 
dred and forty-six feet in length, according to what he supposes to 
be the direction of the vein, and half as much in breadth.^^ He be- 
comes proprietor of this portion of the mine, and can work it with- 
out paying any acknowledgment to the landlord. The interest of 
the duke of Cornwall has given occasion to a regulation nearly of 
the same kind in that ancient dutchy. In waste and uninclosed lands 
any person who discovers a tin mine, may mark out its limits to a 
certain extent, which is called bounding a mine. The bounder be- 
comes the real proprietor of the mine, and may either work it him- 
self, or give it in lease to another, without the consent of the owner 
of the land, to whom, however, a very small acknowledgment must 
be paid upon working it.^^ In both regulations the sacred rights of 
private property are sacrificed to the supposed interests of public 
revenue. 


The same encouragement is given in Peru to the discovery and 
working of new gold mines; and in gold the king’s tax amounts only 
to a twentieth part of the standard metal. It was once a fifth, and 
afterwards a tenth, as in silver; but it was found that the work 
could not bear even the lowest of these two taxes.^® If it is rare, how- 


Quand un homme temoigne avoir dessein de fouiller dans quelque mine, 
Ics autres le regardent comme un extravagant qui court a sa perte, et qui risque 
une ruine certame pour des esperances eloignees et tres-douteuses. Ils tSchent 
de le detoumer de son dessein, et s’ils n'y peuvent reussir, ils le fuyent en I’^vi- 
tant, comme s’ils craignaient qu’il ne leur communiquat son Voyage 
msionque ae VAmerique miridionale par don George Juan et par don An- 
toine de Ulloa, 1752, tom. i., p. 379. The statement relates to the province of 
yuito, and the condition of things is contrasted with that prevailing in Peru 
proper. For Frezier see next page, note 47. h s u 

"Frezier, Voyage, p. 109, 

PP- 167, 175. If the land was 
bounded (boundmg could only take place on “wastrel or common”) the 
i<^^d of the soil received only a fifteenth. 

could not bear it*” ^ ^ ^ 



RENT OE LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^71 

ever, say the same authors, Frezier and Ulloa, to find a person who 
has made his fortune by a silver, it is still much rarer to find one 
who has done so by a gold mine.'^’' This twentieth part seems to be 
the whole rent which is paid by the greater part of the gold mines 
in Chili and Peru. Gold too is much more liable to be smuggled than 
even silver; not only on account of the superior value of the metal 
in proportion to its bulk, but on account of the peculiar way in 
which nature produces it. Silver is very seldom found virgin, but, 
like most other metals, is generally mineralized with some other 
body, from which it is impossible to separate it in such quantities 
as will pay for the expence, but by a very laborious and tedious 
operation, which cannot well be carried on but in workhouses 
erected for the purpose, and therefore exposed to the inspection of 
the king’s officers. Gold, on the contrary, is almost always found 
virgin. It is sometimes found in pieces of some bulk; and even when 
mixed in small and almost insensible particles with sand, earth, and 
other extraneous bodies, it can be separated from them by a very 
short and simple operation, which can be carried on in any private 
house by any body who is possessed of a small quantity of mercury. 
If the king’s tax, therefore, is but ill paid upon silver, it is likely to 
be much worse paid upon gold; and rent must make a much smaller 
part of the price of gold, than even of that of silver. 

The lowest price at which the precious metals can be sold, or the 
smallest quantity of other goods for which they can be exchanged 
during any considerable time, is regulated by the same principles 
which fix the lowest ordinary price of all other goods. The stock 
which must commonly be employed, the food, cloaths, and lodging 
which must commonly be consumed in bringing them from the mine 
to the market, determine it. It must at least be sufficient to replace 
that stock, with the ordinary profits. 

Their highest price, however, seems not to be necessarily deter- 
mined by any thing but the actual scarcity or plenty of those metals 
themselves. It is not determined by that of any other commodity, 
in the same manner as the price of coals is by that of wood, beyond 
which no scarcity can ever raise it. Increase the scarcity of gold to a 

“It is more rare to see a gold miner rich than a silver miner or of any 
other metal.”-~Frezier, Voyage, p. io8. There seems nothing in either Frezier 
or Ulloa to indicate that they took the gloomy view of the prospects of the 
gold and silver miner which is ascribed to them in the text From this and the 
curious way in which they are coupled together, here and above (pp. i68, 
169) , and also the fact that no mention is made of the title of either of their 
books, it seems probable that Smith is quoting from memory or from notes 
which had become mixed. It is possible that he confused Frezier with UUoa’s 
collaborator, Don George Juan, but Ulloa is quoted without Frezier above, 
p. 148, and below, p. 186. 


The low- 
est price 
of the 
precious 
metals 
must re- 
place 
stock with 
ordinary 
profits, 

but their 
highest 
price is 
deter- 
mined by 
their 
scarcity. 



The de- 
mand for 
them 
arises 
from 
their 
utility 
and 

beauty: 


and the 
merit of 
beauty is 
enhanced 
by their 
scarcity. 


The de- 
mand for 
precious 
stones 
arises al- 
together 
from their 
beauty 
enhanced 
by their 
scarcity. 


172 the wealth of nations 

certain degree, and the smallest bit of it may become more precious 
than a diamond, and exchange for a greater quantity of other goods. 

The demand for those metals arises partly from their utility, and 
partly from their beauty. If you except iron, they are more useful 
than, perhaps, any other metal. As they are less liable to rust and 
impurity, they can more easily be kept clean; and the utensils either 
of the table or the kitchen are often upon that account more agree- 
able when made of them. A silver boiler is more cleanly that a lead, 
copper, or tin one; and the same quality would render a gold boiler 
still better than a silver one. Their principal merit, however, arises 
from their beauty, which renders them peculiarly fit for the orna- 
ments of dress and furniture. No paint or dye can give so splendid 
a colour as gilding. The merit of their beauty is greatly enhanced by 
their scarcity. With the greater part of rich people, the chief enjoy- 
ment of riches consists in the parade of riches, which in their eye is 
never so complete as when they appear to possess those decisive 
marks of opulence which nobody can possess but themselves. In 
their eyes the merit of an object which is in any degree either useful 
or beautiful, is greatly enhanced by its scarcity, or by the great la- 
bour which it requires to collect any considerable quantity of it, a 
labour which nobody can afford to pay but themselves. Such objects 
they are willing to purchase at a higher price than things much 
more beautiful and useful, but more common. These qualities of 
utility, beauty, and scarcity, are the original foundation of the high 
price of those metals, or of the great quantity of other goods for 
which they can every-where be exchanged. This value was anteced- 
ent to and independent of their being employed as coin, and was the 
quality which fitted them for that employment. That employment, 
however, by occasioning a new demand, and by diminishing the 
quantity which could be employed in any other way, may have 
afterwards contributed to keep up or increase their value. 

The demand for the precious stones arises altogether from their 
beauty. They are of no use, but as ornaments; and the merit of 
their beauty is greatly enhanced by their scarcity, or by the diffi- 
culty and expence of getting them from the mine. Wages and profit 
accordingly make up, upon most occasions, almost the whole of their 
high price. Rent comes in but for a very small share; frequently for 
no share; and the most fertile mines only afford any considerable . 
rent. When Tavernier, a jeweller, visited the diamond mines of Gol- 
conda and Visiapour, he was informed that the sovereign of the 
country, for whose benefit they were wrought, had ordered all of 
them to be shut up, except those which yielded the largest and finest 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^73 

stones.^® The others, it seems, were to the proprietor not worth the 
working. 

As the price both of the precious metals and of the precious 
stones is regulated all over the world by their price at the most 
fertile mine in it, the rent which a mine of either can afford to its 
proprietor is in proportion, not to its absolute, but to what may be 
called its relative fertility, or to its superiority over other mines of 
the same kind. If new mines were discovered as much superior to 
those of Potosi as they were superior to those of Europe, the value 
of silver might be so much degraded as to render even the mines of 
Potosi not worth the working. Before the discovery of the Spanish 
West Indies, the most fertile mines in Europe may have afforded as 
great a rent to their proprietor as the richest mines in Peru do at 
present. Though the quantity of silver was much less, it might have 
exchanged for an equal quantity of other goods, and the proprie- 
tor’s share might have enabled him to purchase or command an 
equal quantity either of labour or of commodities. The value both 
of the produce and of the rent, the real revenue which they afforded 
Doth to the public and to the proprietor, might have been the same. 

The most abundant mines either of the precious metals or of the 
precious stones could add little to the wealth of the world. A produce 
of which the value is principally derived from its scarcity, is neces- 
sarily degraded by its abundance. A service of plate, and the other 
frivolous ornaments of dress and furniture, could be purchased for 
a smaller quantity of labour, or for a smaller quantity of commodi- 
ties; and in this would consist the sole advantage which the world 
could derive from that abundance. 

It is otherwise in estates above ground. The value both of their 
produce and of their rent is in proportion to their absolute, and not 
to their relative fertility. The land which produces a certain quan- 
tity of food, deaths, and lodging, can always feed, cloath, and 
lodge a certain number of people; and whatever may be the pro- 
portion of the landlord, it will always give him a proportionable 
command of the labour of those people, and of the commodities 
with which that labour can supply him. The value of the most bar- 

^ The Six Voyages of John Baptista Tavernier , a noble man of France now 
living, through Turkey into Persia and the East Indies, translated by J. P., 
1678, does not appear to contain any such statement. Possibly it is merely 
founded on Tavernier’s remark that “there was a mine discovered between 
Coulour and Raolconda, which the King caused to be shut up again by reason 
of some cheats that were used there ; for they found therein that sort of stones 
which had this green outside, fair and transparent, and which appeared more 
fair than the others, but when they came to the mill they crumbled to pieces’’ 
<pt. ii., p. 138). In eds. 4 and s “yielded” is misprinted “yield.” 


The rent 
of mines 
of 

precious 
metals 
and pre- 
cious 
stones is 
in propor- 
tion to 
their rela- 
tive and 
not to 
their ab- 
solute 
fertility. 


Abundant 
supplies 
would add 
little to 
the wealth 
of the 
world. 


But in es- 
tates 
above 
ground 
both pro- 
duce and 
rent are 
regulated 
by abso- 
lute fer- 
tility. 



Abund- 
ance of 
food 

raises the 
value of 
other pro- 
duce. 


The gen- 
eral 


174 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ren lands is not diminished by the neighbourhood of the most fer- 
tile. On the contrary, it is generally increased by it. The great 
number of people maintained by the fertile lands affords a market 
to many parts of the produce of the barren, which they could 
never have found among those whom their own produce could 
maintain. 

Whatever increases the fertility of land in producing food, in- 
creases not only the value of the lands upon which the improvement 
is bestowed, but contributes likewise to increase that of many other 
lands, by creating a new demand for their produce. That abun- 
dance of food, of which, in consequence of the improvement of 
land, many people have the disposal beyond what they themselves 
can consume, is the great cause of the demand both for the 
precious metals and the precious stones, as well as for every other 
conveniency and ornament of dress, lodging, household furniture, 
and equipage. Food not only constitutes the principal part of the 
riches of the world, but it is the abundance of food which gives the 
principal part of their value to many other sorts of riches. The 
poor inhabitants of Cuba and St. Domingo, when they were first 
discovered by the Spaniards, used to wear little bits of gold as or- 
naments in their hair and other parts of their dress. They seemed 
to value them as we would do any little pebbles of somewhat more 
than ordinary beauty, and to consider them as just worth the pick- 
ing up, but not worth the refusing to any body who asked them. 
They gave them to their new guests at the first request, without 
seeming to think that they had made them any very valuable pres- 
ent. They were astonished to observe the rage of the Spaniards to 
obtain them; and had no notion that there could anywhere be a 
country in which many people had the disposal of so great a super- 
fluity of food, so scanty always among themselves, that for a very 
small quantity of those glittering baubles they would willingly 
give as much as might maintain a whole family for many years. 
Could they have been made to understand this, the passion of the 
Spaniards would not have surprised them. 


Part III 

Of the Variations in the Proportion between the respective Values 
of that Sort of Produce which always affords Rent, and of that 
which sometimes does and sometimes does not afford Rent 

The increasing abundance of food, in consequence of increasing im- 
provement and cultivation, must necessarily increase the demand 



RENT OF LAND FROM HUMAN FOOD ^75 

for every part of the produce of land which is not food, and which 
can be applied either to use or to ornament. In the whole progress 
of improvement, it might therefore be expected, there should be 
only one variation in the comparative values of those two different 
sorts of produce. The value of that sort which sometimes does and 
sometimes does not afford rent, should constantly rise in proportion 
to that which always affords some rent. As art and industry ad- 
vance, the materials of cloathing and lodging, the useful fossils and 
minerals of the earth, the precious metals and the precious stones 
should gradually come to be more and more in demand, should 
gradually exchange for a greater and a greater quantity of food, or 
in other words, should gradually become dearer and dearer. This 
accordingly has been the case with most of these things upon most 
occasions, and would have been the case with all of them upon all 
occasions, if particular accidents had not upon some occasions in- 
creased the supply of some of them in a still greater proportion than 
the demand. 

The value of a free-stone quarry, for example, will necessarily in- 
crease with the increasing improvement and population of the coun- 
try round about it; especially if it should be the only one in the 
neighbourhood. But the value of a silver mine, even though there 
should not be another within a thousand miles of it, will not neces- 
sarily increase with the improvement of the country in which it is 
situated. The market for the produce of a free-stone quarry can sel- 
dom extend more than a few miles round about it, and the demand 
must generally be in proportion to the improvement and popula- 
tion of that small district. But the market for the produce of a silver 
mine may extend over the whole known world. Unless the world in 
general, therefore, be advancing in improvement and population, 
the demand for silver might not be at all increased by the improve- 
ment even of a large country in the neighbourhood of the mine. 
Even though the world in general were improving yet, if, in the 
course of its improvement, new mines should be discovered, much 
more fertile than any which had been known before, though the de- 
mand for silver would necessarily increase, yet the supply might in- 
crease in so much a greater proportion, that the real price of that 
metal might gradually fall; that is, any given quantity, a pound 
weight of it, for example, might gradually purchase or command a 
smaller and a smaller quantity of labour, or exchange for a smaller 
and a smaller quantity of corn, the principal part of the subsistence 
of the labourer. 

The great market for silver is the commercial and civilized part 
of the world. 


course of 
progress 
is for pro- 
duce other 
than food 
to become 
dearer, 


but there 
are inter- 
ruptions, 


as in the 
case of 
silver, 


when new 
fertile 
mines are 
dis- 
covered. 



Silver 
would 
grow 
dearer in 
the gen- 
eral prog- 
ress of 
improve- 
ment, 

but might 
grow 
cheaper if 
someacci- 
dot in- 
creased 
the supply 
for many 
years to- 
gether: 

or remain 
stationary 
if demand 
and sup- 
ply in- 
creased 
equally. 

These 
three 
things 
have hap- 
pened 
during the 
last 400 
years. 


From 
1350 to 
1570 sil- 
ver gradu- 
ally fell. 


176 the wealth of nations 

If by the general progress of improvement the demand of this 
market should increase, while at the same time the supply did not 
increase in the same proportion, the value of silver would gradually 
rise in proportion to that of corn. Any given quantity of silver 
would exchange for a greater and a greater quantity of corn; or, in 
other words, the average money price of corn would gradually be- 
come cheaper and cheaper. 

If, on the contrary, the supply by some accident should increase 
for many years together in a greater proportion than the demand, 
that metal would gradually become cheaper and cheaper; or, in 
other words, the average money price of corn would, in spite of all 
improvements, gradually become dearer and dearer. 

But if, on the other hand, the supply of the metal should increase 
nearly in the same proportion as the demand, it would continue to 
purchase or exchange for nearly the same quantity of corn, and the 
average money price of corn would, in spite of all improvements, 
continue very nearly the same. 

These three seem to exhaust all the possible combinations of 
events which can happen in the progress of improvement; and dur- 
ing the course of the four centuries preceding the present, if we may 
judge by what has happened both in France and Great Britain, each 
of those three different combinations seem to have taken place 
in the European market, and nearly in the same order too in which 
I have here set them down. 


Digression concerning the Variations in the Value of Silver during 
the Course of the Four last Centuries 

First Period 

In 1350, and for some time before, the average price of the quart er 
of wheat in England seems not to have been estimated lower than 
four ounces of silver. Tower-weight, equal to about twenty shillings 
of our present money. From this price it seems to have fallen gradu- 
ally to two ounces of silver, equal to about ten shillings of our pres- 
ent money, the price at which we find it estimated in the beginning 
of the sixteenth century, and at which it seems to have continued to 
be estimated till about 1570.^^ 

In 1350, being the 25* of Edward III, was enacted what is 
" Ed. I reads “seems ” 

The evidence for this statement, which does not agree with the figures in 
the table at the end of the chapter, is given in the next eleven paragraphs. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER ^77 

called, The statute of labourers.^^ In the preamble it complains 
much of the insolence of servants, who endeavoured to raise their 
wages upon their masters;^^ It therefore ordains, that all servants 
and labourers should for the future be contented with the same 
wages and liveries (liveries in those times signified, not only cloaths, 
but provisions) which they had been accustomed to receive in the 
20th year of the king, and the four preceding years; that upon 
this account their livery wheat should no-where be estimated higher 
than ten-pence a bushel, and that it should always be in the option 
of the master to deliver them either the wheat or the money. Ten- 
pence a bushel, therefore, had, in the 25th of Edward III, been 
reckoned a very moderate price of wheat, since it required a par- 
ticular statute to oblige servants to accept of it in exchange for their 
usual livery of provisions; and it had been reckoned a reasonable 
price ten years before that, or in the i6th year of the king, the term 
to which the statute refers. But in the i6th year of Edward III, 
ten-pence contained about half an ounce of silver, Tower-weight, 
and was nearly equal to half a crown of our present money Four 
ounces of silver, Tower-weight, therefore, equal to six shillings and 
eight-pence of the money of those times, and to near twenty shill- 
ings of that of the present, must have been reckoned a moderate 
price for the quarter of eight bushels. 

This statute is surely a better evidence of what was reckoned in 
those times a moderate price of grain, than the prices of some par- 
ticular years which have generally been recorded by historians and 
other writers on account of their extraordinary dearness or cheap- 
ness, and from which, therefore, it is difficult to form any judgment 
concerning what may have been the ordinary price.®® There are, be- 
sides, other reasons for believing, that in the beginning of the four- 

Already quoted above, p. 130. 

It speaks of the Act of 1349, which ordered a continuance of wages at the 
level of 20 Edward III, and five or six years before (1347 or 1348 to 1333), 
as having been passed “against the malice of servants which were idle and not 
willing to serve after the pestilence without taking excessive wages ” and 
gives as the reason for new provisions “forasmuch as it is given the King to 
understand in this present Parliament by the petition of the commonalty that 
the said servants having no regard to the said ordinance, but to their ease and 
singular covetise, do withdraw themselves to serve great men and other, 
unless they have livery and wages to the double or treble of that they were 
wont to take the said twentieth year and before, to the great damage of the 
great men and impoverishing of all the said commonalty, whereof the said 
commonalty prayeth remedy.” 

1 . 6 ., four years before the twentieth year. 

This and the other reductions of ancient money to the eighteenth century 
standard are probably founded on the table in Martin Folkes, Table of Eng- 
lish Silver Coins, 1745, p. 142. 

E.g., Fleetwood’s prices in the table at the end of the chapter. 


In 1330 
'wheat 
was 4 oz. 
of silver 
per 

quarter, 


and was 
not less 
than that 
at the be- 
ginning of 
the cen- 
tury, 



and for 
some time 
before. 


17S the wealth of nations 

teenth century, and for some time before, the common price of 
wheat was not less than four ounces of silver the quarter, and that 
of other grain in proportion. 

In 1309, Ralph de Bom, prior of St. Augustine’s, Canterbury, 
gave a feast upon his installation-day, of which William Thorn has 
preserved, not only the bill of fare, but the prices of many particu- 
lars. In that feast were consumed, ist, Fifty-three quarters of wheat, 
which cost nineteen pounds, or seven shillings and two-pence a 
quarter, equal to about one-and-twenty shillings and six-pence of 
our present money; 2dly, Fifty-eight quarters of malt, which cost 
seventeen pounds ten shillings, or six shillings a quarter, equal to 
about eighteen shillings of our present money: 3dly, Twenty 
quarters of oats, which cost four pounds, or four shillings a quarter, 
equal to about twelve shillings of our present money The prices of 
malt and oats seem here to be higher than their ordinary proportion 
to the price of wheat. 

These prices are not recorded on account of their extraordinary 
dearness or cheapness, but are mentioned accidentally as the prices 
actually paid for large quantities of grain consumed at a feast 
which was famous for its magnificence. 

In 1262, being the 51st of Henry III, was revived an ancient 
statute called. The Asdze of Bread and which, the king says 
in the preamble, had been made in the times of his progenitors 
sometime kings of England. It is probably, therefore, as old at 
least as the time of his grandfather Henry II, and may have been 
as old as the conquest. It regulates the price of bread according as 
the prices of wheat may happen to be, from one shilling to twenty 
shillings the quarter of the money .of those times. But statutes of 
this kind are generally presumed to provide with equal care for all 
deviations from the middle price, for those below it as well as those 
above it. Ten shillings, therefore, containing six ounces of silver. 
Tower-weight, and equal to about thirty shillings of our present 
money, must, upon this supposition, have been reckoned the mid- 
dle price of the quarter of wheat when this statute was first en- 
acted, and must have continued to be so in the sist of Henry III. 
We cannot therefore be very wrong in supposing that the middle 
price was not less than one-third of the highest price at which this 


“Fleetwood, Chromcon Preciosum, 1707, pp. 83-85 
The date 1262 is wrong as 51 Hen. III. ran from October 28. 1266, to 
Octob^ 27, 1267. But the editions of the statutes which ascribe the statute 
VI authority for doing so; see Statutei. 

of the Realm, vol. 1., p. 199, notes. The statute has already been quoted above, 
p. 26, and IS quoted again below, p. 183. uauuvc, 

“ Ed. I reads “very far wrong ” 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER ^79 

statute regulates the price of bread, or than six shillings and eight- 
pence of the money of those times, conijaining four ounces of sil- 
ver, Tower-weight. 

From these different facts, therefore, we seem to have some rea- 
son to conclude, that about the middle of the fourteenth century, 
and for a considerable time before, the average or ordinary price 
of the quarter of wheat was not supposed to be less than four 
ounces of silver, Tower-weight. 

From about the middle of the fourteenth to the beginning of the 
sixteenth century, what was reckoned the reasonable and moder- 
ate, that is the ordinary or average price of wheat, seems to have 
sunk gradually to about one-half of this price; so as at last to have 
fallen to about two ounces of silver. Tower-weight, equal to about 
ten shillings of our present money. It continued to be estimated at 
this price till about 1570. 

In the houshold book of Henry, the fifth earl of Northumber- 
land, drawn up in 1512, there are two different estimations of 
wheat. In one of them it is computed at six shillings and eight- 
pence the quarter, in the other at five shillings and eight-pence 
only.®*^ In 1512, six shillings and eight-pence contained only two 
ounces of silver. Tower-weight, and were equal to about ten shill- 
ings of our present money. 

From the 25th of Edward III, to the beginning of the reign of 
Elizabeth, during the space of more than two hundred years, six 
shillings and eight-pence, it appears from several different statutes, 
had continued to be considered as what is called the moderate and 
reasonable, that is the ordinary or average price of wheat. The 
quantity of silver, however, contained in that nominal sum was, 
during the course of this period, continually diminishing, in con- 
sequence of some alterations which were made in the coin. But the 
increase of the value of silver had, it seems, so far compensated the 
diminution of the quantity of it contained in the same nominal 
sum, that the legislature did not think it worth while to attend to 
this circumstance. 

Thus in 1436 it was enacted, that wheat might be exported with- 
out a licence when the price was so low as six shillings and eight- 
pence:®^ And in 1463 it was enacted, that no wheat should be im- 

The Regulations and Establishment of the Hoitsehold of Henry Algernon 
Percy, the fifth Earl of Northumberland, at his castles of Wresill and Lekin- 
field in Yorkshire, begun anno domini MDXIL, 1770, pp. 2, 4, but there are 
not really two estimations. It seems dear that “vs. viijd.” on p. 4 is merely a 
misprint or mistake for “vis. viijd, since 118 qrs. 2 bushels are reckoned at 
£39 8s. 4d. 

«‘>i5 Hen. VI, c. 2. 


From that 
it sank 
gradually 
to 2 oz. at 
the begin- 
ning of 
the six- 
teenth 
century 
and re- 
mained at 
that til] 

1570. 



i8o 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


The same 
fall has 
been ob- 
served in 
France. 


It may 
have been 


ported if the price was not above six shillings and eight-pence the 
quarter.®^ The legislature had imagined, that when the price was 
so low, there could be no inconveniency in exportation, but that 
when it rose higher, it became prudent to allow of importation. Six 
shillings and eight-pence, therefore, containing about the same 
quantity of silver as thirteen shillings and four-pence of our pres- 
ent money (one third part less than the same nominal sum con- 
tained in the time of Edward III), had in those times been consid- 
ered as what is called the moderate and reasonable price of wheat. 

In 1554, by the ist and 2d of Philip and Mary; and in 1558, 
by the ist of Elizabeth,®^ the exportation of wheat was in the same 
manner prohibited, whenever the price of the quarter should ex- 
ceed six shillings and eight-pence, which did not then contain two 
penny worth more silver than the same nominal sum does at pres- 
ent. But it had soon been found that to restrain the exportation of 
wheat till the price was so very low, was in reality, to prohibit it al- 
together. In 1562, therefore, by the 5th of Elizabeth,^^ the expor- 
tation of wheat was allowed from certain ports whenever the price 
of the quarter should not exceed ten shillings, containing nearly 
the same quantity of silver as the nominal sum does at present. 
This price had at this time, therefore, been considered as what is 
called the moderate and reasonable price of wheat. It agrees nearly 
with the estimation of the Northumberland book in 1512, 

That in France the average price of grain was, in the same man- 
ner, much lower in the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the 
sixteenth century, than in the two centuries preceding, has been 
observed both by Mr. Dupre de St. Maur, and by the elegant au- 
thor of the Essay on the police of grain. Its price, during the 
same period, had probably sunk in the same manner through the 
greater part of Europe. 

This rise in the value of silver, in proportion to that of corn, may 
either have been owing altogether to the increase of the demand for 


“3 Ed. IV„ c. 2. 

I and 2 P . and M., c. 5, § 7. Licences for exportation, however, are recog- 
nised by the Act. 

c ^ however, merely partially exempts Norfolk and 

Suffolk from regulations intended to prevent exportation from places where 
no custom-house existed. 


“sEHz.,c.5, §17. 

Neither his Reckerckes s»r la vakw des Uonnoies el sur les prix des 
grams avant el aprh k concUe de Francfort, 1762, nor his Essai sur les Mon- 
nms. ou riflenons sur h rapport entre Vargent el Us denries, 1746, contain 
any clear justification for this reference. 

“From 1446 to 1515 “k ble fut plus has que dans les sikles precedents.” 
— Asso! sur lapobce ginirale des grains sur leur pm et sur les egets de I’agri- 
culture, I7SS (by C. J. Herbert), pp. 259, 260. 0 ue ^ 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER iSi 

that metal, in consequence of increasing improvement and cultiva- 
tion, the supply in the mean time continuing the same as before: 
Or, the demand continuing the same as before, it may have been 
owing altogether to the gradual diminution of the supply; the 
greater part of the mines which were then known in the world, be- 
ing much exhausted, and consequently the expence of working 
them much increased: Or it may have been owing partly to the one 
and partly to the other of those two circumstances. In the end of 
the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth centuries, the greater 
part of Europe was approaching towards a more settled form of 
government than it had enjoyed for several ages before. The in- 
crease of security would naturally increase industry and improve- 
ment; and the demand for the precious metals, as well as for every 
other luxury and ornament, would naturally increase with the in- 
crease of riches. A greater annual produce would require a greater 
quantity of coin to circulate it; and a greater number of rich people 
would require a greater quantity of plate and other ornaments of 
silver. It is natural to suppose too, that the greater part of the 
mines which then supplied the European market with silver, might 
be a good deal exhausted, and have become more expensive in the 
working. They had been wrought many of them from the time of 
the Romans. 

It has been the opinion, however, of the greater part of those 
who have written upon the prices of commodities in ancient times, 
that, from the Conquest, perhaps from the invasion of Julius 
Caesar, till the discovery of the mines of America, the value of sil- 
ver was continually diminiiSiing. This opinion they seem to have 
been led into, partly by the observations which they had occasion 
to make upon the prices both of corn and of some other parts of the 
rude produce of land; and partly by the popular notion, that as the 
quantity of silver naturally increases in every country with the in- 
crease of v^ealth, so its value diminishes as its quantity increases. 

In their observations upon the prices of corn, three different cir- 
cumstances seem frequently to have misled them. 

First, In ancient times almost all rents were paid in kind; in a 
certain quantity of corn, cattle, poultry, &c. It sometimes hap- 
pened, however, that the landlord would stipulate, that he should 
be at liberty to demand of the tenant, either the annual payment 
in kind, or a certain sum of money instead of it. The price at which 
the pa)nnent in kind was in this manner exchanged for a certain 
sum of money, is in Scotland called the conversion price. As the op- 
tion is always in the landlord to take either the substance or the 

^ Ed. I reads “with the tenant” here and omits “of the tenant” in next line. 


due to the 
increase 
of de- 
mand for 
silver or 
to a dimi- 
nution of 
supply. 


Most 
writers, 
however, 
have sup- 
posed that 
the value 
of silver 
continual- 
ly fell. 


They 
have been 
misled in 
their ob- 
servations 
on the 
price of 
corn, 

(i) by 
confusing 
conver- 
sion 
prices 



\irith mar- 
ket prices; 


(2) by the 
slovenly 
transcrip- 
tion of 
ancient 
statutes of 
assize; 


182 the wealth of nations 

price, it is necessary for the safety of the tenant, that the conver- 
sion price should rather be below than above the average market 
price. In many places, accordingly, it is not much above one-half of 
this price. Through the greater part of Scotland this custom still 
continues with regard to poultry, and in some places with regard to 
cattle. It might probably have continued to take place too with re- 
gard to corn, had not the institution .of the public fiars put an end 
to it. These are annual valuations, according to the judgment of an 
assize, of the average price of all the different sorts of grain, and of 
all the different qualities of each, according to the actual market 
price in every different county. This institution rendered it suffi- 
ciently safe for the tenant, and much more convenient for the land- 
lord, to convert, as they call it, the corn rent, rather at what should 
happen to be the price of the fiars of each year,®® than at any cer- 
tain fixed price. But the writers who have collected the prices of 
corn in ancient times, seem frequently to have mistaken what is 
called in Scotland the conversion price for the actual market price. 
Fleetwood acknowledges, upon one occasion, that he had made this 
mistake. As he wrote his book, however, for a particular purpose, 
he does not think proper to make this acknowledgment till after 
transcribing this conversion price fifteen times.®® The price is eight 
shillings the quarter of wheat. This sum in 1423, the year at which 
he begins with it, contained the same quantity of silver as sixteen 
shillings of our present money. But in 1562, the year at which he 
ends with it, it contained no more than the same nominal sum does 
at present. 

Secondly, They have been misled by the slovenly manner in 
which some ancient statutes of assize had been sometimes tran- 
scribed by lazy copiers; and sometimes perhaps actually composed 
by the legislature. 

The ancient statutes of assize seem to have begun always with 
determining what ought to be the price of bread and ale when the 
price of wheat and barley were at the lowest, and to have proceeded 
gradually to determine what it ought to be, according as the prices 
of those two sorts of grain should gradually rise above this lowest 
price. But the transcribers of those statutes seem frequently to 
have thought it sufficient, to copy the regulation as far as the three 
or four first and lowest prices; saving in this manner their own la- 

® Ed. I reads “rent at the price of the fiars of each year rather.” 

^Ckronicon Predosum, 1707, pp. 121, 122. Fleetwood does not “acknowl- 
edge” any “mistake,” but says that thought the price was not the market price 
it might have been “well agreed upon.” His “particular purpose” was to 
prove that in order to qualify for a fellowship a man might conscientiously 
swear his income to be much less than it was. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 1S3 

hour, and judging, I suppose, that this was enough to show what 
proportion ought to be observed in all higher prices. 

Thus in the assize of bread and ale, of the 51st of Henry III, the 
price of bread was regulated according to the different prices of 
wheat, from one shilling to twenty shillings the quarter, of the 
money of those times. But in the manuscripts from which all the 
different editions of the statutes, preceding that of Mr. Ruffhead, 
were printed, the copiers had never transcribed this regulation be- 
yond the price of twelve shillings.'^® Several writers, therefore, be- 
ing misled by this faulty transcription, very naturally concluded 
that the middle price, or six shillings the quarter, equal to about 
eighteen shillings of our present money, was the ordinary or aver- 
age price of wheat at that time. 

In the statute of Tumbrel and Pillory enacted nearly about 
the same time, the price of ale is regulated according to every six- 
pence rise in the price of barley, from two shillings to four shillings 
the quarter. That four shillings, however, was not considered as 
the highest price to which barley might frequently rise in those 
times, and that these prices were only given as an example of the 
proportion which ought to be observed in all other prices, whether 
higher or lower, we may infer from the last words of the statute; 
“et sic deinceps crescetur vel diminuetur per sex denarios.” The ex- 
pression is very slovenly, but the meaning is plain enough; “That 
the price of ale is in this manner to be increased or diminished ac- 
cording to every sixpence rise or fall in the price of barley.” In the 
composition of this statute the legislature itself seems to have been 
as negligent as the copiers were in the transcription of the other. 

In an ancient manuscript of the Regiam Majestatem, an old 
Scotch law book, there is a statute of assize, in which the price of 
bread is regulated according to all the different prices of wheat, 
from ten-pence to three shillings the Scotch boll, equal to about 
half an English quarter. Three shillings Scotch, at the time when 
this assize is supposed to have been enacted, were equal to about 
nine shillings sterling of our present money. Mr. Ruddiman*^^ 
seems to conclude from this that three shillings was the highest 
price to which wheat ever rose in those times, and that ten-pence, 
a shilling, or at most two shillings, were the ordinary prices. Upon 

™The statement is too sweeping. See Statutes of tU Realm, vol. i., pp. 
xxiv and 199, notes. Ruifhead’s edition began to be published in 1762. 

'^’•Judicium Pillorie, temp, incert., ascribed to 51 Hen. III., stat. 6. 

Eds. I and 2 read “Rudiman.” 

” See his preface to Anderson’s Diplomata Scoriae. [Selectus diplomatum et 
mmismatum Scotiae thesaurus, 1739, p. 82, and in the translation, An Intro- 
duction to Mr, James Anderson’s Diplomata Scotiae, by Thomas Ruddiman, 
M.A., Edinburgh, 1773, pp. 170, 174, 228. The note appears first in ed. 2.] 


or by mis- 
under- 
standings 
of those 
statutes; 



and (3) 
by at- 
tributing 
too much 
import- 
ance to 
excessive- 
ly low 
prices. 


184 THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

consulting the manuscript, however, it appears evidently, that all 
these prices are only set down as examples of the proportion which 
ought to be observed between the respective prices of wheat and 
bread. The last words of the statute are “reliqua judicabis secun- 
dum praescripta habendo respectum ad pretium bladi.’^ “You shall 
judge of the remaining cases according to what is above written 
having a respect to the price of corn.’’ 

Thirdly, They seem to have been misled too by the very low 
price at which wheat was sometimes sold in very ancient times; and 
to have imagined, that as its lowest price was then much lower than 
in later times, its ordinary price must likewise have been much 
lower. They might have found, however, that in those ancient 
times, its highest price was fully as much above, as its lowest price 
was below any thing that had ever been known in later times. 
Thus in 1270, Fleetwood gives us two prices of the quarter of 
wheat.'^® The one is four pounds sixteen shillings of the money of 
those times, equal to fourteen pounds eight shillings of that of the 
present; the other is six pounds eight shillings, equal to nineteen 
pounds four shillings of our present money. No price can be found 
in the end of the fifteenth, or beginning of the sixteenth century, 
which approaches to the extravagance of these. The price of corn, 
though at all times liable to variation,^® varies most in those tur- 
bulent and disorderly societies, in which the interruption of all 
commerce and communication hinders the plenty of one part of the 
country from relieving the scarcity of another. In the disorderly 
state of England under the Plantagenets, who governed it from 
about the middle of the twelfth, till towards the end of the fifteenth 
century, one district might be in plenty, while another at no great 
distance, by having its crop destroyed either by some accident of 
the seasons, or by the incursion of some neighbouring baron, might 
be suffering all the horrors of a famine; and yet if the lands of some 
hostile lord were interposed between them, the one might not be 
able to give the least assistance to the other. Under the vigorous 
administration of the Tudors, who governed England during the 
latter part of the fifteenth, and through the whole of the sixteenth 

^^The manuscript appears to be the Alexander FouKs MS., now 25. 4. 10. 
in the Edinburgh Advocates’ Library, No. viii. of the MSS., described in 
Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, vol. i. The exact words are “Memoran- 
dum quod reliqua judicabis secundum praedicta habendo respectum ad prae- 
scripta bladi precium duplicando.” 

'^^Chronicon Preciosum, p. 78. Fleetwood quotes the author of Antiq. Bri- 
tan. in Vita Joh. Pecham as saying that “provisions were so scarce that par- 
ents did eat their own children.” 

’®Eds. I to 3 read “variations.” 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 185 

century, no baron was powerful enough to dare to disturb the pub- 
lic security. 

The reader will find at the end of this chapter all the prices of 
wheat which have been collected by Fleetwood from 1202 to 1597, 
both inclusive, reduced to the money of the present times, and di- 
gested according to the order of time, into seven divisions of twelve 
years each. At the end of each division too, he will find the average 
price of the twelve years of which it consists. In that long period of 
time, Fleetwood has been able to collect the prices of no more than 
eighty years, so that four years are wanting to make out the last 
twelve years. I have added, therefore, from the accounts of Eton 
College, the prices of 1598, 1599, 1600, and 1601.''^ It is the only 
addition which I have made. The reader will see, that from the be- 
ginning of the thirteenth, till after the middle of the sixteenth cen- 
tury, the average price of each twelve years grows gradually lower 
and lower; and that towards the end of the sixteenth century it be- 
gins to rise again. The prices, indeed, which Fleetwood has been 
able to collect, seem to have been those chiefly which were remark- 
able for extraordinary dearness or cheapness; and I do not pretend 
that any very certain conclusion can be drawn from them. So far, 
however, as they prove any thing at all, they confirm the account 
which I have been endeavouring to give. Fleetwood himself, how- 
ever, seems, with most other writers, to have believed,'^® that during 
all this period the value of silver, in consequence of its increasing 
abundance, was continually diminishing. The prices of corn which 
he himself has collected, certainly do not agree with this opinion. 
They agree perfectly with that of Mr. Dupre de St. Maur, and 
with that which I have been endeavouring to explain. Bishop Fleet- 
wood and Mr. Dupre de St. Maur are the two authors who seem to 
have collected, with the greatest diligence and fidelity, the prices 
of things in ancient times. It is somewhat curious that, though their 
opinions are so very different, their facts, so far as they relate to 
the price of corn at least, should coincide so very exactly. 

It is not, however, so much from the low price of corn, as from 
that of some other parts of the rude produce of land, that the most 
judicious writers have inferred the great value of silver in those 
very ancient times. Corn, it has been said, being a sort of manufac- 
ture, was, in those rude ages, much dearer in proportion than the 

^ See the table, pp. 251-255 below. 

This appears to be merely an inference from the fact that he does not 
take notice of fluctuations. 

Above, p. 180. 


The fig- 
ures at 
the end of 
the chap- 
ter con- 
firm this 
account. 


Some- 
times the 
value of 
silver has 
been mea- 
sured by 



the price 
of cattle, 
poultry, 
etc. But 
the low 
price of 
these 
things 
shows 
their 

cheapness, 
not the 
dearness 
of silver, 


for labour 
is the real 
measure. 

Cattle, 
poultry, 
etc., are 
produced 
by very 
different 
quantities 
of labour 
at differ- 
ent times, 

whereas 

com 


the wealth of nations 

greater part of other commodities; it is meant, I suppose, than the 
greater part of unmanufactured commodities ; such as cattle, poul- 
try, game of all kinds, &c. That in those times of poverty and bar- 
barism these were proportionably much cheaper than corn, is un- 
doubtedly true. But this cheapness was not the effect of the high 
value of silver, but of the low value of those commodities. It was 
not because silver would in such times purchase or represent a 
greater quantity of labour, but because such commodities would 
purchase or represent a much smaller quantity than in times of 
more opulence and improvement. Silver must certainly be cheaper 
in Spanish America than in Europe; in the country where it is pro- 
duced, than in the country to which it is brought, at the expence of 
a long carriage both by land and by sea, of a freight and an insur- 
ance, One-and-twenty pence halfpenny sterling, however, we are 
told by Ulloa, was, not many years ago, at Buenos Ayres, the price 
of an ox chosen from a herd of three or four hundred.®^ Sixteen 
shillings sterling, we are told by Mr. B3T:on, was the price of a good 
horse in the capital of Chili.^^ In a country naturally fertile, but of 
which the far greater part is altogether uncultivated, cattle, poul- 
try, game of all kinds, &c. as they can be acquired with a very small 
quantity of labour, so they will purchase or command but a very 
small quantity. The low money price for which they may be sold, 
is no proof that the real value of silver is there very high, but that 
the real value of those commodities is very low. 

Labour, it must always be remembered, and not any particular 
commodity or set of commodities, is the real measure of the value 
both of silver and of all other commodities. 

But in countries almost waste, or but thinly inhabited, cattle, 
poultry, game of all kinds, &c. as they are the spontaneous produc- 
tions of nature, so she frequently produces them in much greater 
quantities than the consumption of the inhabitants requires. In 
such a state of things the supply commonly exceeds the demand. In 
different states of society, in different stages of improvement, there- 
fore, such commodities will represent, or be equivalent to, very 
different quantities of labour. 

In every state of society, in every stage of improvement, corn 
is the production of human industry. But the average produce of 

Ed. I reads “that” instead of “because,” here and also two lines above. 

^Voyage historiqm de VAmirique mSridionale, vol. i , p. 552, where, how- 
ever, the number of cattle is two or three hundred, as correctly quoted above, 
p. 148. 

Narrative of the Hon, John Byron, containing an account of the Great 
Distresses suffered by himself and his companions on the Coast of Patagonia 
from 1740 tq 1746, 1768, pp. 212, 220. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 


187 


every sort of industry is always suited, more or less exactly, to the 
average consumption; the average supply to the average demand. 
In every different stage of improvement, besides, the raising of 
equal quantities of corn in the same soil and climate, will, at an 
average, require nearly equal quantities of labour; or what comes 
to the same thing, the price of nearly equal quantities; the con- 
tinual increase of the productive powers of labour in an improv- 
ing state of cultivation being more or less counterbalanced by 
the continually increasing price of cattle, the principal instru- 
ments of agriculture. Upon all these accounts, therefore, we may 
rest assured, that equal quantities of corn wiU, in every state of 
society, in every stage of improvement, more nearly represent, or 
be equivalent to, equal quantities of labour, than equal quantities 
of any other part of the rude produce of land. Corn, accordingly, 
it has already been observed,®^ is, in all the different stages of 
wealth and improvement, a more accurate measure of value than 
any other commodity or set of commodities. In all those different 
stages, therefore, we can judge better of the real value of silver, by 
comparing it with corn, than by comparing it with any other com- 
modity, or set of commodities. 

Corn, besides, or whatever else is the common and favourite 
vegetable food of the people, constitutes, in every civilized coun- 
try, the principal part^of the subsistence of the labourer. In con- 
sequence of the extension of agriculture, the land of every country 
produces a much greater quantity of vegetable than of animal 
food, and the labourer every-where lives chiefly upon the whole- 
some food that is cheapest and most abundant. Butcher’s-meat, 
except in the most thriving countries, or where labour is most 
highly rewarded, makes but an insignificant part of his subsist- 
ence; poultry makes a still smaller part of it, and game no part of 
it. In France, and even in Scotland, where labour is somewhat 
better rewarded than in France, the labouring poor seldom eat 
butcher^s-meat, except upon holidays, and other extraordinary oc- 
casions. The money price of labour, therefore, depends much 
more upon the average money price of com, the subsistence of the 
labourer, than upon that of butcher's-meat, or of any other part 
of the rude produce of land. The real value of gold and silver, 
therefore, the real quantity of labour which they can purchase or 
command, depends much more upon the quantity of corn which 
they can purchase or command, than upon that of butcher’s-meat, 
or any other part of the rude produce of land. 

Such slight observations, however, upon the prices either of 

“Above, p. 38. 


scarcely 
varies at 
all, 


and also 
regulates 
the money 
price of 
labour 


“Misprinted “improved” in ed. 5. 



The 
authors 
were also 
misled by 
the notion 
that silver 
falls in 
value as 
its quan- 
tity in- 
creases. 


Increase 
of quan- 
tity aris- 
ing from 
greater 
abun- 
dance of 
the mines 
is con- 
nected 
with di- 
minution 
of value, 

but in- 
crease of 
quantity 
resulting 
from the 
increased 
wealth of 
a country 
is not. 


Gold and 
silver are 
dearer in 
a rich 
country, 


iS8 the wealth of nations 

corn or of other commodities, would not probably have misled so 
many intelligent authors, had they not been influenced, at the 
same time, by the popular notion, that as the quantity of silver 
naturally increases in every country with the increase of wealth, 
so its value diminishes as its quantity increases. This notion, how- 
ever, seems to be altogether groundless. 

The quantity of the precious metals may increase in any coun- 
try from two different causes: either, first, from the increased 
abundance of the mines which supply it; or, secondly, from the 
increased wealth of the people, from the increased produce of 
their annual labour. The first of these causes is no doubt neces- 
sarily connected with the diminution of the value of the precious 
metals; but the second is not. 

When more abundant mines are discovered, a greater quantity 
of the precious metals is brought to market, and the quantity of 
the necessaries and conveniences of life for which they must be 
exchanged being the same as before, equal quantities of the 
metals must be exchanged for smaller quantitife of commodities. 
So far, therefore, as the increase of the quantity of the precious 
metals in any country arises from the increased abundance of the 
mines, it is necessarily connected with some diminution of their 
value. 

When, on the contrary, the wealth of any country increases^ 
when the annual produce of its labour becomes gradually greater 
and greater, a greater quantity of coin becomes necessary in order 
to circulate a greater quantity of commodities: and the people, as 
they can afford it, as they have more commodities to give for it, 
will naturally purchase a greater and a greater quantity of plate. 
The quantity of their coin will increase from necessity; the quan- 
tity of their plate from vanity and ostentation, or from the same 
reason that the quantity of fine statues, pictures, and of every 
other luxury and curiosity, is likely to increase among them. But 
as statuaries and painters are not likely to be worse rewarded in 
times of wealth and prosperity, than in times of poverty and de- 
pression, so gold and silver are not likely to be worse paid for. 

The price of gold and silver, when the accidental discovery of 
more abundant mines does not keep it down, as it naturally rises 
with the wealth of every country, so, whatever be the state of the 
mines, it is at all times naturally higher in a rich than in a poor 
country. Gold and silver, like all other commodities, naturally 
seek the market where the best price is given for them, and the 
best price is commonly given for every thing in the country which 

^ Ed. I reads “had they not been agreeable to the popular notion.’^ 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 1S9 

can best af ord it. Labour, it must be remembered, is the ultimate 
price which is paid for every thing, and in countries where labour 
is equally well rewarded, the money price of labour will be in pro- 
portion to that of the sul3sistence of the labourer. But gold and sil- 
ver will naturally exchange for a greater quantity of subsistence 
in a rich than in a poor country, in a country which abounds with 
subsistence, than in one which is but indifferently supplied with it. 

If the two countries are at a great distance, the difference may be 
very great; because though the metals naturally fly from the 
worse to the better market, yet it may be difficult to transport 
them in such quantities as to bring their price nearly to a level in 
both. If the countries are near, the difference will be smaller, and 
may sometimes be scarce perceptible; because in this case the 
transportation will be easy. China is a much richer country than as may be 
any part of Europe, and the difference between the price of sub- co^r-^ 
sistence in China and in Europe is very great. Rice in China is jpg China 
much cheaper than wheat is any-where in Europe. England is a with 
much richer country than Scotland; but the difference between andSwt^ 
the money-price of corn in those two countries is much smaller, land with 
and is but just perceptible. In proportion to the quantity or meas- 
ure, Scotch corn generally appears to be a good deal cheaper than price 0 / 
English; but in proportion to its quality, it is certainly somewhat subsist- 
dearer. Scotland receives almost every year very large supplies 
from England, and every commodity must commonly be some- 
what dearer in the country to which it is brought than in that 
from which it comes. English com, therefore, must be dearer in 
Scotland than in England, and yet in proportion to its quality, or 
to the quantity and goodness of the flour or meal which can be 
made from it, it cannot commonly be sold higher there than the 
Scotch corn which comes to market in competition with it. 

The difference between the money price of labour in China and 
in Europe, is still greater than that between the money price of 
subsistence; because the real recompence of labour is higher in 
Europe than in China, the greater part of Europe being in an im- 
proving state, while China seems to be standing still. The money 
price of labour is lower in Scotland than in England, because the 
real recompence of labour is much lower; Scotland, though ad- 
vancing to greater wealth, is advancing much more slowly than 
England.®® The frequency of emigration from Scotland, and the 
rarity of it from England, sufficiently prove that the demand for 
labour is very different in the two countries.®’^ The proportion be- 
tween the real recompence of labour in different countries, it must 


Above, p. 90. 


®^This sentence is not in ed. i. 



Gold and 
silver are 
cheapest 
among the 
poorest 
nations. 

The fact 
that corn 
is dearer 
in towns 
is due to 
its dear- 
ness there, 
not to the 
cheapness 
of silver, 

and this is 
true also 
in Hol- 
land, 
Genoa, 
etc. 


So no in- 
crease of 
silver due 
to the in- 


190 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

be remembered, is naturally regulated, not by their actual wealth 
or poverty, but by their advancing, stationary, or declining con- 
dition. 

Gold and silver, as they are naturally of the greatest value 
among the richest, so they are naturally of the least value among 
the poorest nations. Among savages, the poorest of all nations, 
they are of scarce any value. 

In great towns corn is always dearer than in remote parts of 
the country. This, however, is the effect, not of the real cheapness 
of silver, but of the real dearness of corn. It does not cost less la- 
bour to bring silver to the great town than to the remote parts of 
the country; but it costs a great deal more to bring corn. 

In some very rich and commercial countries, such as Holland 
and the territory of Genoa, corn is dear for the same reason that 
it is dear in great towns. They do not produce enough to maintain 
their inhabitants. They are rich in the industry and skill of their 
artificers and manufacturers; in every sort of machinery which 
can facilitate and abridge labour; in shipping, and in all the other 
instruments and means of carriage and commerce: but they are 
poor in corn, which, as it must be brought to them from distant 
countries, must, by an addition to its price, pay for the carriage 
from those countries. It does not cost less labour to bring silver 
to Amsterdam than to Dantzick; but it costs a great deal more to 
bring corn. The real cost of silver must be nearly the same in both 
places; but that of corn must be very different. Diminish the real 
opulence either of Holland or of the territory of Genoa, while the 
number of their inhabitants remains the same: diminish their 
power of supplying themselves from distant countries; and the 
price of corn, instead of sinking with that diminution in the quan- 
tity of their silver, which must necessarily accompany this declen- 
sion either as its cause or as its effect, will rise to the price of a 
famine. When we are in want of necessaries we must part with all 
superfluities, of which the value, as it rises in times of opulence 
and prosperity, so it sinks in times of poverty and distress. It is 
otherwise with necessaries. Their real price, the quantity of labour 
which they can purchase or command, rises in times of poverty 
and distress, and sinks in times of opulence and prosperity, which 
are always times of great abundance; for they could not other- 
wise be times of opulence and prosperity. Corn is a necessary, sil- 
ver is only a superfluity. 

Whatever, therefore, may have been the increase in the quan- 
tity of the precious metals, which, during the period between the 
middle of the fourteenth and that of the sixteenth century, arose 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 


191 


from the increase of wealth and improvement, it could have no crease of 
tendency to diminish their value either in Great Britain, or in any 
other part of Europe. If those who have collected the prices of havere- 
things in ancient times, therefore, had, during this period, no rea- ducedits 
son to infer the diminution of the value of silver, from any obser- 
vations which they had made upon the prices either of corn or of 
other commodities, they had still less reason to infer it from any 
supposed increase of wealth and improvement. 

Second Period 

But how various soever may have been the opinions of the No doubt 

learned concerning the progress of the value of silver during this 

first period, they are unanimous concerning it during the second, second 

From about 1570 to about 1640, during a period of about sev- period, 
enty years, the variation in the proportion between the value of 
silver and that of corn, held a quite opposite course. Silver sunk in ^^^and 
its real value, or would exchange for a smaller quantity of labour a quarter 
than before; and corn rose in its nominal price, and instead of be- com 

ing commonly sold for about two ounces of silver the quarter, or b^^orth 

about ten shillings of our present money, came to be sold for six 6oz.or8 

and eight ounces of silver the quarter, or about thirty and forty 
shillings of our present money. 

The discovery of abundant mines of America, seems to have This was 

been the sole cause of this diminution in the value of silver in pro- 
portion to that of corn. It is accounted for accordingly in the same covery of 
manner by every body; and there never has been any dispute theabun- 

either about the fact, or about the cause of it. The greater part of Amwican 

Europe was, during this period, advancing in industry and im- mines, 
provement, and the demand for silver must consequently have 
been increasing. But the increase of the supply had, it seems, so 
far exceeded that of the demand, that the value of that metal sunk 
considerably. The discovery of the mines of America, it is to be 
observed, does not seem to have had any very sensible effect upon 
the prices of things in England till after 1570; though even the 
mines of Potosi had been discovered more than twenty years 
before.®^ 

From 1595 to 1620, both inclusive, the average price of the Wheat 
quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market, ap- win^r 

pears from the accounts of Eton College,®^ to have been 2I, is. 6 d. market. 

® In 1545. Ed. I reads “thirty” instead of “twenty.” In ed. 2 the correction 
is in the errata. See below p. 201, notes 4 and 5. 

“ See the table at the end of the chapter, p. 256. 



The effect 
of the dis- 
covery of 
the 

American 
mines 
was com- 
plete 
about 
1636. 

From 
1637 to 
1700 there 
was a 
very slight 
rise of 
wheat at 
Windsor, 


due to the 
civil war, 


192 the wealth of nations 

From which sum, neglecting the fraction, and deducting a 
ninth, or 4$, the price of the quarter of eight bushels comes 
out to have been iL i6s, lod. And from this sum, neglecting 
likewise the fraction, and deducting a ninth, or 4s. id. •^, for the 
difference between the price of the best wheat and that of the 
middle wheat,^® the price of the middle wheat comes out to have 
been about iL 12s. M. |, or about six ounces and one-third of an 
ounce of silver. 

From 1621 to 1636, both inclusive, the average price of the 
same measure of the best wheat at the same market, appears, from 
the same accounts, to have been 2I. 105.; from which making the 
like deductions as in the foregoing case, the average price of the 
quarter of eight bushels of middle wheat comes out to have been 
iL igs. 6d. or about seven ounces and two-thirds of an ounce of 
silver. 


Third Period 

Between 1630 and 1640, or about 1636, the effect of the discov- 
ery of the mines of America in reducing the value of silver, ap- 
pears to have been completed, and the value of that metal seems 
never to have sunk lower in proportion to that of corn than it was 
about that time. It seems to have risen somewhat in the course of 
the present century, and it had probably begun to do so even 
some time before the end of the last. 

From 1637 to 1700, both inclusive, being the sixty-four last 
years of the last century, the average price of the quarter of nine 
bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market, appears, from the 
same accounts, to have been 2L iis. od.j; which is only od. 

dearer than it had been during the sixteen years before. But in 
the course of these sixty-four years there happened two events 
which must have produced a much greater scarcity of corn than 
what the course of the seasons would otherwise have occasioned, 
and which, therefore, without supposing any further reduction in 
the value of silver, will much more than account for this very 
small enhancement of price. 

The first of these events was the civil war, which, by discourag- 
ing tillage and interrupting commerce, must have raised the price 
of corn much above what the course of the seasons would other- 

“The deduction of this ninth is recommended by Charles Smith, T/iree 
Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws, 2nd ed., 1766, p. 104, because, “it 
hath been found that the value of all the wheat fit for bread, if mixed to- 
gether, would be eight-ninths of the value of the best wheat.” 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER ^93 

wise have occasioned. It must have had this effect more or less at 
all the different markets in the kingdom, but particularly at those 
in the neighbourhood of London, which require to be supplied 
from the greatest distance. In 1648, accordingly, the price of the 
best wheat at Windsor market, appears, from the same accounts, 
to have been 4Z. 55. and in 1649 to have been 4L the quarter of 
nine bushels. The excess of those two years above 2I. 105. (the 
average price of the sixteen years preceding 1637) is 3/. 55.; 
which divided among the sixty-four last years of the last century, 
will alone very nearly account for that small enhancement of price 
which seems to have taken place in them. These, however, though 
the highest, are by no means the only high prices which seem to 
have been occasioned by the civil wars. 

The second event was the bounty upon the exportation of corn, 
granted in 1688.^^ The bounty, it has been thought by many 
people, by encouraging tillage, may, in a long course of years, 
have occasioned a greater abundance, and consequently a greater 
cheapness of corn in the home-market, than what would other- 
wise have taken place there. How far the bounty could produce 
this effect at any time, I shall examine hereafter I shall only 
observe at present, that between 1688 and 1700, it had not time 
to produce any such effect.^^ During this short period its only 
effect must have been, by encouraging the exportation of the sur- 
plus produce of every year, and thereby hindering the abundance 
of one year from compensating the scarcity of another, to raise 
the price in the home-market. The scarcity which prevailed in 
England from 1693 to 1699, both inclusive, though no doubt 
principally owing to the badness of the seasons, and, therefore, 
extending through a considerable part of Europe, must have been 
somewhat enhanced by the bounty. In 1699, accordingly, the fur- 
ther exportation of corn was prohibited for nine months. 

®^By I W. & M., c. 12, “An act for the encouraging the exportation of 
corn,” the preamble of which alleges that “it hath been found by experience, 
that the exportation of com and grain into foreign parts, when the price 
thereof is at a low rate in this kingdom, hath been a great advantage not only 
to the owners of land but to the trade of this kingdom in general.” It pro- 
vides that when malt or barley does not exceed 24s. per Winchester quarter, 
rye 32s. and wheat 48s. in any port, every person exporting such corn on an 
English ship with a crew at least two-thirds English shall receive from the 
Customs 2s. 6d. for every quarter of barley or malt, 3s. 6d. for every quar- 
ter of rye and 3s. for every quarter of wheat. 

“Below, pp. 473-483. _ 

^ In place, of “How far the bounty could produce this effect at any time I 
shall examine hereafter: I shall only observe at present that,” ed. i reads 
simply “But.” 

For “not” ed. i reads “no,” and for “any such” it reads “this.” 

The Act 10 Will. III., c. 3, prohibits exportation for one year from loth 


the 

bounty on 
the ex- 
portation 
of com. 



and the 
cKpping 
and wear- 
ing of the 
coin, 


which was 
then much 
greater 
than in 
the pres- 
ent cen- 
tury. 


194 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

There was a third event which occurred in the course of the 
same period, and which, though it could not occasion any scarcity 
of corn, nor, perhaps, any augmentation in the real quantity of 
silver which was usually paid for it, must necessarily have occa- 
sioned some augmentation in the nominal sum. This event was 
the great debasement of the silver coin, by clipping and wear- 
ing. This evil had begun in the reign of Charles II. and had gone 
on continually increasing till 1695; at which time, as we may 
learn from Mr. Lowndes, the current silver coin was, at an aver- 
age, near five-and-twenty per cent, below its standard value.®'^ 
But the nominal sum which constitutes the market-price of every 
commodity is necessarily regulated, not so much by the quantity 
of silver, which, according to the standard, ought to be contained 
in it, as by that which, it is found by experience, actually is con- 
tained in it. This nominal sum, therefore, is necessarily higher 
when the coin is much debased by clipping and wearing, than 
when near to its standard value. 

In the course of the present century, the silver coin has not at 
any time been more below its standard weight than it is at pres- 
ent. But though very much defaced, its value has been kept up by 
that of the gold coin for which it is exchanged.^^ For though be- 
fore the late re-coinage, the gold coin was a good deal defaced too, 
it was less so than the silver. In 1695, on the contrary, the value 
of the silver coin was not kept up by the gold coin; a guinea then 
commonly exchanging for thirty shillings of the worn and dipt 
silver.^^*® Before the late re-coinage of the gold, the price of silver 

February, 1699. The mistake “nine months” is probably due to a misreading 
of C. Smith, Tracts on the Corn Trade, p. 9, wheat “growing, and continuing 
dearer till 1698, the exportation was forbid for one year, and then for nme 
months the bounty was suspended” (cp. pp. 44, 119). As a matter of fact, the 
bounty was suspended by ii & 12 Will. III., c. i, from 9th February, 1699, 
to 29th September, 1700, or not much more than seven months and a half. 
The Act II & 12 Will. III., c. i, alleges that the Act granting the bounty “was 
grounded upon the highest wisdom and prudence and has succeeded to the 
greatest benefit and advantage to the nation by the greatest encouragement 
of tillage,” and only suspends it because “it appears that the present stock 
and quantity of corn in this kingdom may not be sufficient for the use and 
service of the people at home should there be too great an exportation into 
parts beyond the seas, which many persons may be prompted to do for their 
own private advantage and the lucre of the said bounty .”— of the 
Realm, vol. vii,, p. 544. 

®®For “debasement” ed. i reads “degradation.” 

^ Lowndes says on p. 107 of his Report Containing an Essay for the Am- 
endment of the Silver Coins, 1695, “the moneys commonly current are dimin- 
ished near one-half, to wit, in a proportion something greater than that of ten 
to twenty-two.” But in the text above, the popular estimate, as* indicated by 
the price of silver bullion, is accepted, as in the next paragraph. 

"^Ed. I reads “degraded.” ®®See above, p, 41. 

^“Lowndes, Essay, p. 88 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER i 9 S 

bullion was seldom higher than five shillings and seven-pence an 
ounce^ which is but five-pence above the mint price. But in 1695, 
the common price of silver bullion was six shillings and five-pence 
an ounce/®^ which is fifteen-pence above the mint price. Even 
before the late re-coinage of the gold,^®^ therefore, the coin, gold 
and silver together, when compared with silver bullion, was not 
supposed to be more than eight per cent, below its standard value. 
In 169s, on the contrary, it had been supposed to be near five- 
and-twenty per cent, below that value. But in the beginning of 
the present century, that is, immediately after the great re-coin- 
age in King William^s time, the greater part of the current silver 
coin must have been still nearer to its standard weight than it is at 
present. In the course of the present century too there has been no 
great public calamity, such as the civil war, which could either 
discourage tillage, or interrupt the interior commerce of the coun- 
try. And though the bounty which has taken place through the 
greater part of this century, must always raise the price of com 
somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in the actual state of 
tillage; yet as, in the course of this century, the bounty has 
had full time to produce all the good effects commonly imputed to 
it, to encourage tillage, and thereby to increase the quantity of 
corn in the home market, it may, upon the principles of a system 
which I shall explain and examine hereafter, be supposed to 
have done something to lower the price of that commodity the one 
way, as well as to raise it the other. It is by many people sup- 
posed to have done more.^^® In the sixty-four first years of the 
present century accordingly, the average price of the quarter of 
nine bushels of the best wheat at Windsor market, appears, by 
the accounts of Eton College, to have been 2I. o^. 6d. whici 
is about ten shillings and sixpence, or more than five-and-twenty 
per cent, cheaper than it had been during the sixty-four last 
years of the last century; and about nine shillings and sixpence 
cheaper than it had been during the sixteen years preceding 1636, 

Lowndes’s Essay on the Silver Coin, p. 68. This note appears first in 
ed. 2. 

^ Above, p. 41. 

^°®The meaning is “given a certain area and intensity of cultivation, the 
bounty will raise the price of corn.” 

^“^Ed. I does not contain “upon the principles of a system which I shall 
explain hereafter.” The reference is presumably to pp. 473-483. 

^ Ed. I reads here “a notion which I shall examine hereafter.” 

^ Doubtless by a misprint ed. 5 omits “first.” The term is used again at 
the end of the paragraph and also on pp. 197, 198. 

^ See the table at the end of the chapter: is a mistake for^^. 

“®The 23 per cent, is erroneously reckoned on the £2 os. 6j|d. instead of 
on the £2 IIS. ojd. The fall of price is really less than 21 per cent. 


Moreover 

the 

bounty 
has been 
long 

enough in 
existence 
to pro- 
duce any 
possible 
effect in 
lowering 
the price 
of corn. 



Silver has 
risen 

somewhat 
since the 
beginning 
of the 
century, 
and the 
rise began 
before ; 

as is 

shown by 
Mr. 
King’s 
calcula- 
tions. 


196 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

when the discovery of the abundant mines of America may be 
supposed to have produced its full effect; and about one shilling 
cheaper than it had been in the twenty-six years preceding 1620, 
before that discovery can well be supposed to have produced its 
full effect. According to this account, the average price of middle 
wheat, during these sixty-four first years of the present century, 
comes out to have been about thirty-two shillings the quarter of 
eight bushels. 

The value of silver, therefore, seems to have risen somewhat in 
proportion to that of com during the course of the present cen- 
tury, and it had probably begun to do so even some time before 
the end of the last. 

In 1687, the price of the quarter of nine bushels of the best 
wheat at Windsor market was il, 5^. 2d, the lowest price at which 
it had ever been from 1595. 

In 1688, Mr. Gregory King, a man famous for his knowledge in 
matters of this kind, estimated the average price of wheat in years 
of moderate plenty to be to the grower 35. 6^f. the bushel, or eight- 
and-twenty shillings the quarter.^®^ The grower’s price I under- 
stand to be the same with what is sometimes called the contract 
price, or the price at which a farmer contracts for a certain num- 
ber of years to deliver a certain quantity of corn to a dealer. As a 
contract of this kind saves the farmer the expence and trouble of 
marketing, the contract price is generally lower than what is sup- 
posed to be the average market price. Mr. King had judged eight- 
and-twenty shillings the quarter to be at that time the ordinary 
contract price in years of moderate plenty. Before the scarcity 
occasioned by the late extraordinary course of bad seasons, it was, 
I have been assured, the ordinary contract price in all common 
years. 

In 1688 was granted the parliamentary bounty upon the exporta- 
tion of corn.^^^ The country gentlemen, who then composed a still 
greater proportion of the legislature than they do at present, had 
felt that the money price of corn was falling. The bounty was an ex- 

““ The date is taken from the heading of Scheme D in Davenant, Essay 
upon the Probable Means of Making a People Gainers in the Balance of 
Trade, 1699, P- 22, Works, ed. Whitworth, 1771, vol. ii., p, 184. Cp. Natural 
and Political Observations and Conclusions upon the State and Condition of 
England, by Gregory King, Esq., Lancaster, H., in George Chalmers’ Esti- 
mate of the Comparative Strength of Great Britain, 1802, p. 429; in Dave- 
nant, Balance of Trade, pp. 7ij 72> Works, vol. ii., p. 217. Davenant says “this 
value is what the same is worth upon the spot where the corn grew; but this 
value is increased by the carriage to the place where it is at last spent, at 
least i part more.” 

Ed. I does not contain this parenthesis. 


Above, p. 193, note. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 


197 


pedient to raise it artifically to the high price at which it had fre- 
quently been sold in the times of Charles 1. and II. It was to take 
place, therefore, till wheat was so high as forty-eight shillings the 
quarter; that is twenty shillings, or fths dearer than Mr. King 
had in that very year estimated the grower’s price to be in times of 
moderate plenty. If his calculations deserve any part of the reputa- 
tion which they have obtained very universally, eight-and-forty 
shillings the quarter was a price which, without some such expedi- 
ent as the bounty, could not at that time be expected, except in 
years of extraordinary scarcity. But the government of King Wil- 
liam was not then fully settled. It was in no condition to refuse any 
thing to the country gentlemen, from whom it was at that very 
time soliciting the first establishment of the annual land-tax. 

The value of silver, therefore, in proportion to that of corn, had 
probably risen somewhat before the end of the last century; and it 
seems to have continued to do so during the course of the greater 
part of the present; though the necessary operation of the bounty 
must have hindered that rise from being so sensible as it otherwise 
would have been in the actual state of tillage. 

In plentiful years the bounty, by occasioning an extraordinary 
exportation, necessarily raises the price of corn above what it other- 
wise would be in those years. To encourage tillage, by keeping up 
the price of corn even in the most plentiful years, was the avowed 
end of the institution. 

In years of great scarcity, indeed, the bounty has generally been 
suspended. It must, however, have had some effect even upon the 
prices of many of those years. By the extraordinary exportation 
which it occasions in years of plenty, it must frequently hinder the 
plenty of one year from compensating the scarcity of another. 

Both in years of plenty and in years of scarcity, therefore, the 
bounty raises the price of corn above what it naturally would be in 
the actual state of tillage. If, during the sixty-four first years of the 
present century, therefore, the average price has been lower than 
during the sixty-four last years of the last century, it must, in the 
same state of tillage, have been much more so, had it not been for 
this operation of the bounty. 

But without the bounty, it may be said, the state of tillage would 
not have been the same. What may have been the effects of this 
institution upon the agriculture of the country, I shall endeavour 
to explain hereafter, when I come to treat particularly of boun- 
ties. I shall only observe at present, that this rise in the value of 


Apart 
from its 
effect in 
extending 
tillage, 
the 

bounty 
raises the 
price of 
com, both 
in times 
of plenty 
and of 
scarcity. 


It is said 
to have 
extended 
tillage 
(and so to 
havere- 


^ Ed. s, doubtless by a misprint, omits “even.’ 
Below, pp. 473-483- 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


ducedthe 
price), 
but the 
rise of 
silver has 
not been 
peculiar 
to Eng- 
land. 


The al- 
teration 
should be 
regarded 
as a rise 
of silver 
rather 
than a fall 
of corn. 


The re- 
cent high 
price of 
corn is 
merely 
the effect 
of unfa- 
vourable 
seasons. 


198 

silver, in proportion to that of corn, has not been peculiar to Eng- 
land. It has been observed to have taken place in France during the 
same period, and nearly in the same proportion too, by three very 
faithful, diligent, and laborious collectors of the prices of corn, Mr. 
Dupre de St. Maur, Mr. Messance, and the author of the Essay on 
the police of grain.^’-^ But in France, till 1764, the exportation of 
grain was by law prohibited; and it is somewhat difficult to sup- 
pose, that nearly the same diminution of price which took place in 
one country, notwithstanding this prohibition, should in another be 
owing to the extraordinary encouragement given to exportation. 

It would be more proper, perhaps, to consider this variation in 
the average money price of com as the effect rather of some gradual 
rise in the real value of silver in the European market, than of any 
fall in the real average value of corn. Corn, it has already been ob- 
served,^^^ is at distant periods of time a more accurate measure of 
value than either silver, or perhaps any other commodity- When, 
after the discovery of the abundant mines of America, corn rose to 
three and four times its former money price, this change was uni- 
versally ascribed, not to any rise in the real value of corn, but to a 
fall in the real value of silver. If during the sixty-four first years of 
the present century, therefore, the average money price of corn has 
fallen somewhat below what it had been during the greater part of 
the last century, we should in the same manner impute this change, 
not to any fall in the real value of corn, but to some rise in the real 
value of silver in the European market. 

The high price of corn during these ten or twelve years past, in- 
deed, has occasioned a suspicion that the real value of silver still 
continues to fall in the European market. This high price of corn, 
however, seems evidently to have been the effect of the extraordin- 
ary unfavourableness of the seasons, and ought therefore to be re- 
garded, not as a permanent, but as a transitory and occasional 
event. The seasons for these ten or twelve years past have been un- 
favourable through the greater part of Europe; and the disorders 
of Poland have very much increased the scarcity in all those coun- 
tries, which, in dear years, used to be supplied from that market. 
So long a course of bad seasons, though not a very common event, 
is by no means a singular one; and whoever has enquired much in- 


“^The references to Dupre de St. Maur and the Essay (see above, p. 180, 
note), as well as the whole argument of the paragraph, are from Messance. 
Recherches sur la population des giniralitSs d’ Auvergne, etc., p. 281. Mes- 
sance’s quotations are from Dupre’s Essai sur les Monnoies, 1746, p. 68, and 
Herbert’s Essai sur la police generate des grains, 1755, PP- i^j lit 189; cp. be- 
low, p. 240. 

““Above, pp. 35, 36. 


““Examined below, p. 216, 217. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER ^99 

to the history of the prices of corn in former times, will be at no 
loss to recollect several other examples of the same kind. Ten years 
of extraordinary scarcity, besides, are not more wonderful than ten 
years of extraordinary plenty. The low price of corn from 1741 to 
1750, both inclusive, may very well be set in opposition to its high 
price during these last eight or ten years. From 1741 to 1750, the 
average price of the quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat at 
Windsor market, it appears from the accounts of Eton College, was 
only iL i^s, which is nearly 6s. 3d. below the average 

price of the sixty-four first years of the present century.^^^ The 
average price of the quarter of eight bushels of middle wheat, comes 
out, according to this account, to have been, during these ten years, 
only iL 6s. 

Between 1741 and 1750, however, the bounty must have hind- 
ered the price of corn from falling so low in the home market as it 
naturally would have done. During these ten years the quantity of 
all sorts of grain exported, it appears from the custom-house books, 
amounted to no less than eight millions twenty-nine thousand one 
hundred and fifty-six quarters one bushel. The bounty paid for this 
amounted to 1,514,962^. 17^. 4d. In 1749 accordingly, Mr. 
Pelham, at that time prime minister, observed to the House of 
Commons, that for the three years preceding, a very extraordin- 
ary sum had been paid as bounty for the exportation of corn. He 
had good reason to make this observation, and in the following year 
he might have had still better. In that single year the bounty paid 
amounted to no less than 324,176^. los. 6d.^^^ It is unnecessary to 

See the table at the end of the chapter. 

“•®This figure is obtained, as recommended by Charles Smith {Tracts on 
the Corn Trade ^ 1766, p. 104), by deducting one-ninth for the greater size of 
the Windsor measure and one-ninth from the remainder for the difference be- 
tween best and middling wheat. 

“Tract 3d,” referred to a few lines farther on, only gives the quantities 
of each kind of grain exported in each year (pp. no, iii), so that if the 
figures in the text are taken from it they must have been obtained by some- 
what laborious arithmetical operations. The particulars are as follows:— 

Exported. Bounty payable. 

Qr. Bush. 

Wheat .... 3,784,524 I 1946,131 0 

Rye .... 765,056 6 133,884 18 7J 

Barley, malt and oats 3479,575 2 434,946 18 il 


8,029,156 I £1,514,962 17 4J 

^ “Years” is apparently a mistake for “months.” “There is such a super- 
abundance of corn that incredible quantities have been lately exported. I 
should be afraid to mention what quantities have been exported if it did not 
appear upon our custom-house books, but from them it appears that lately 
there was in three months’ time above £220,000 paid for bounties upon corn 
expoxted.^^— Parliamentary History (Hansard), vol. xiv., p 589 
^ See Tracts on the Com Trade ; Tract 3d. This note appears fir§t in ed. 


The 
bounty 
kept up 
the price 
between 
1741 and 
1750. 



200 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


The sud- 
den 

change at 
1750 was 
due to ac- 
cidental 
variation 
of the 
seasons. 


The rise 
in the 
price of 
labour 
has been 
due to in- 
crease of 
demand 
for la- 
bour, not 
to a dimi- 
nution in 
the value 
of silver. 


observe how much this forced exportation must have raised the 
price of corn above what it otherwise would have been in the home 
market. 

At the end of the accounts annexed to this chapter the reader will 
find the particular account of those ten years separated from the 
rest. He will find there too the particular account of the preceding 
ten years, of which the average is likewise below, though not so 
much below, the general average of the sixty-four first years of the 
century. The year 1740, however, was a year of extraordinary scar- 
city. These twenty years preceding 1750, may very well be set in 
opposition to the twenty preceding 1770. As the former were a good 
deal below the general average of the century, notwithstanding the 
intervention of one or two dear years; so the latter have been a good 
deal above it, notwithstanding the intervention of one or two cheap 
ones, of 1759, for example. If the former have not been as much be- 
low the general average, as the latter have been above it, we ought 
probably to impute it to the bounty. The change has evidently been 
too sudden to be ascribed to any change in the value of silver, 
which is always slow and gradual. The suddenness of the effect 
can be accounted for only by a cause which can operate suddenly, 
the accidental variation of the seasons. 

The money price of labour in Great Britain has, indeed, risen 
during the course of the present century. This, however, seems to be 
the effect, not so much of any diminution in the value of silver in 
the European market, as of an increase in the demand for labour 
in Great Britain, arising from the great, and almost universal pros- 
perity of the country. In France, a country not altogether so pros- 
perous, the money price of labour has, since the middle of the last 
century, been observed to sink gradually with the average money 
price of corn. Both in the last century and in the present, the day- 
wages of common labour are there said to have been pretty uni- 
formly about the twentieth part of the average price of the septier 
of Wheat, a measure which contains a little more than four Win 
Chester bushels. In Great Britain the real recompence of labour, it 
has already been shown, the real quantities of the necessaries 
and conveniences of life which are given to the labourer, has in- 
creased considerably during the course of the present century. The 
rise in its money price seems to have been the effect, not of any 
diminution of the value of silver in the general market of Europe, 
but of a rise in the real price of labour in the particular market of 

2. The exports for 1750 are given in C. Smith, op. dt., p, in, as 947,602 qr 
I bush, of wheat, 99,049 qr. 3 bush of rye, and 559,538 qr. 5 bush, of barley 
malt and oats. The bounty on these quantities would be £324,176, los 

^ Above, pp. 76-78. “®Ed. i, perhaps correctly, reads “quantity.” 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 201 

Great Britain, owing to the peculiarly happy circumstances of the 
country. 

For some time after the first discovery of America, silver would 
continue to sell at its former, or not much below its former price. 
The profits of mining would for some time be very great, and much 
above their natural rate. Those who imported that metal into Eu- 
rope, however, would soon find that the whole annual importation 
could not be disposed of at this high price. Silver would gradually 
exchange for a smaller and a smaller quantity of goods. Its price 
would sink gradually lower and lower till it fell to its natural price; 
or to what was just sufficient to pay, according to their natural 
rates, the wages of the labour, the profits of the stock, and the rent 
of the land, which must be paid in order to bring it from the mine 
to the market. In the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, the 
tax of the king of Spain, amounting to a tenth of the gross pro- 
duce, eats up, it has already been observed,^^® the whole rent of the 
land. This tax was originally a half; it soon afterwards fell to a 
third, then to a fifth, and at last to a tenth, at which rate it still con- 
tinues.^^® In the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, this, it 
seems, is all that remains, after replacing the stock of the under- 
taker of the work, together with its ordinary profits; and it seems 
to be universally acknowledged that these profits, which were once 
very high, are now as low as they can well be, consistently with car- 
rying on the works. 

The tax of the king of Spain was reduced to a fifth part of the 
registered silver in 1504/^^ one-and-forty years before iS 4 S/^^ 
the date of the discovery of the mines of Potosi. In the course of 
ninety years,^^® or before 1636, these mines, the most fertile in all 
America, had time sufficient to produce their full effect, or to reduce 
the value of silver in the European market as low as it could well 
fall, while it continued to pay this tax to the king of Spain. Ninety 
years is time sufficient to reduce any commodity, of which there 
is no monopoly, to its natural price, or to the lowest price at which, 
while it pays a particular tax, it can continue to be sold for any 
considerable time together. 

Ed. I reads “fifth ” Above, pp. 169, 170. ^ 

Ed. I reads “fell to a third and then to a fifth, at which rate it still con- 
tinues.” 

^Solorzano, vol. ii. Solorzano-Pereira, De Indiarum Jure, Madrid, i 777 » 
lib. V., cap. i., §§ 22, 23; vol. ii., p. 883, col. 2. Ed. i does not contain the 

note. . . 

Ed. I reads “one and thirty years before iSSS- The date iS 4 S is given m 
Solorzano, op. cit., vol. ii., p. 882, col 2. 

^-’®Ed. I reads “In the course of a century.” 

Ed. I reads “A hundred years.” 


The de- 
crease in 
the rent 
and profit 
of mines 
of gold 
and silver 



202 


THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 


has been 
stayed by 
the gra- 
dual en- 
largement 
of the 
market, 


(I) in 
Europe, 


(2) in 

America 

itself, 


The price of silver in the European market might perhaps have 
fallen still lower, and it might have become necessary either to re- 
duce the tax upon it, not only to one tenth, as in 1736, but to one 
twentieth,^®^ in the same manner as that upon gold, or to give up 
working the greater part of the American mines which are now 
wrought. The gradual increase of the demand for silver, or the 
gradual enlargement of the market for the produce of the silver 
mines of America, is probably the cause which has prevented this 
from happening, and which has not only kept up the value of silver 
in the European market, but has perhaps even raised it somewhat 
higher than it was about the middle of the last century. 

Since the first discovery of America, the market for the produce 
of its silver mines has been growing gradually more and more ex- 
tensive. 

First, The market of Europe has become gradually more and 
more extensive. Since the discovery of America, the greater part of 
Europe has been much improved. England, Holland, France and 
Germany; even Sweden, Denmark, and Russia, have all advanced 
considerably both in agriculture and in manufactures. Italy seems 
not to have gone backwards. The fall of Italy preceded the conquest 
of Peru. Since that time it seems rather to have recovered a little. 
Spain and Portugal, indeed, are supposed to have gone backwards. 
Portugal, however, is but a very small part of Europe, and the de- 
clension of Spain is not, perhaps, so great as is commonly imagined. 
In the beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain was a very poor 
country, even in comparison with France, which has been so much 
improved since that time. It was the well-known remark of the Em- 
peror Charles V. who had travelled so frequently through both 
countries, that every thing abounded in France, but that every 
thing was wanting in Spain. The increasing produce of the agricul- 
ture and manufactures of Europe must necessarily have required a 
gradual increase in the quantity of silver coin to circulate it; and 
the increasing number of wealthy individuals must have required 
the like increase in the quantity of their plate and other ornaments 
of silver. 

Secondly, America is itself a new market for the produce of its 
own silver mines; and as its advances in agriculture, industry, and 
population, are much more rapid than those of the most thriving 
countries in Europe, its demand must increase much more rapidly. 
The English colonies are altogether a new market, which partly 
for coin and partly for plate, requires a continually augmenting 

Ed. I reads “lower” instead of “reduce,” and does not contain “not only 
to one-tenth, as in 1736, but to one-twentieth.” See above, p. 169, note 



203 


DIGRESSION ON SILVER 

supply of silver through a great continent where there never was 
any demand before. The greater part too of the Spanish and Portu- 
guese colonies are altogether new markets. New Granada, the Yuca- 
tan, Paraguay, and the Brazils were, before discovered by the Euro- 
peans, inhabited by savage nations, who had neither arts nor agri- 
culture. A considerable degree of both has now been introduced into 
all of them. Even Mexico and Peru, though they cannot be con- 
sidered as altogether new markets, are certainly much more exten- 
sive ones than they ever were before. After all the wonderful tales 
which have been published concerning the splendid state of those 
countries in ancient times, whoever reads, with any degree of sober 
judgment, the history of their first discovery and conquest, will evi- 
dently discern that, in arts, agriculture, and commerce, their in- 
habitants were much more ignorant than the Tartars of the Uk- 
raine are at present. Even the Peruvians, the more civilized nation 
of the two, though they made use of gold and silver as ornaments, 
had no coined money of any kind. Their whole commerce was car- 
ried on by barter, and there was accordingly scarce any division of 
labour among them. Those who cultivated the ground were obliged 
to build their own houses, to make their own household furniture, 
their own clothes, shoes, and instruments of agriculture. The few 
artificers among them are said to have been all maintained by the 
sovereign, the nobles, and the priests, and were probably their serv- 
ants or slaves. All the ancient arts of Mexico and Peru have never 
furnished one single manufacture to Europe.^®^ The Spanish armies, 
though they scarce ever exceeded five hundred men, and frequently 
did not amount to half that number, found almost every-where 
great difficulty in procuring subsistence. The famines which they 
are said to have occasioned almost wherever they went, in countries 
too which at the same time are represented as very populous and 
well-cultivated, sufficiently demonstrate that the story of this popu- 
lousness and high cultivation is in a great measure fabulous. The 
Spanish colonies are under a government in many respects less fa- 
vourable to agriculture, improvement and population, than that of 
the English colonies.^^^ They seem, however, to be advancing in all 
these much more rapidly than any country in Europe. In a fertile 
soil and happy climate, the great abundance and cheapness of 
land, a circumstance common to all new colonies, is, it seems, so 
great an advantage as to compensate many defects in civil govern- 
ment. Frezier, who visited Peru in 1713, represents Lima as contain- 

Below, p. 335. Raynal, Histoire philosophique, Amsterdam ed, i773j tom. 
iii , pp 1 13, 1 16, takes the same view of the Peruvians. 

Below, pp. S33-S54, passim. 



^nd (3) 
'nthe 
East In- 
dies, 


204 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ing between twenty-five and twenty-eight thousand inhabitants.^^^ 
Ulloa, who resided in the same country between 1 740 and 1 746, rep- 
resents it as containing more than fifty thousand.^®® The difference 
in their accounts of the populousness of several other principal 
towns in Chili and Peru is nearly the same; and as there seems 
to be no reason to doubt of the good information of either, it marks 
an increase which is scarce inferior to that of the English colonies. 
America, therefore, is a new market for the produce of its own sil- 
ver mines, of which the demand must increase much more rapidly 
than that of the most thriving country in Europe. 

Thirdly, The East Indies is another market for the produce of 
the silver mines of America, and a market which, from the time of 
the first discovery of those mines, has been continually taking off a 
greater and a greater quantity of silver. Since that time, the direct 
trade between America and the East Indies, which is carried on by 
means of the Acapulco ships,^^*^ has been continually augmenting, 
and the indirect intercourse by the way of Europe has been aug- 
menting in a still greater proportion. During the sixteenth century, 
the Portuguese were the only European nation who carried on any 
regular trade to the East Indies. In the last years of that century the 
Dutch began to encroach upon this monopoly, and in a few years 
expelled them from their principal settlements in India. During the 
greater part of the last century those two nations divided the most 
considerable part of the East India trade between them; the trade 
of the Dutch continually augmenting in a still greater proportion 
than that of the Portuguese declined. The English and French car- 
ried on some trade with India in the last century, but it has been 
greatly augmented in the course of the present. The East India 
trade of the Swedes and Danes began in the course of the present 
century. Even the Muscovites now trade regularly with China by a 
sort of caravans which go over land through Siberia and Tartary to 
Pekin. The East India trade of all these nations, if we except that of 
the French, which the last war had well nigh annihilated, has been 
almost continually augmenting. The increasing consumption of 

^Voyage to the South Sea, p. 218, but the number mentioned is twenty- 
five to thirty thousand. 

^Voyage histonque, tom i, p. 443, 445: “sixteen to eighteen thousand 
persons of Spanish extraction, a comparatively small number of Indians and 
half-breeds, the greater part of the population being negroes and mulattoes ” 

^E.g., Santiago and Callao, Frezier, Voyage, pp. 102, 202; Juan and Ul- 
loa, Voyage kistorique, vol. i , p. 468; vol ii , p. 49. 

“^Originally one ship, and, after 1720, two ships, were allowed to sail be- 
tween Acapulco in Mexico and the Philippines. For the regulations applied to 
the trade see Uztariz, Theory and Practice of Commerce and Maritime Af- 
fairs, trans. by John Kippax, 1751, vol. i., pp. 206-208. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 205 

East India goods in Europe is, it seems, so great, as to afford a 
gradual increase of employment to them all. Tea, for example, was 
a drug very little used in Europe before the middle of the last cen- 
tury. At present the value of the tea annually imported by the Eng- 
lish East India Company, for the use of their own countrymen, 
amounts to more than a million and a half a year; and even this is 
not enough; a great deal more being constantly smuggled into the 
country from the ports of Holland, from Gottenburg in Sweden, and 
from the coast of France too, as long as the French East India Com- 
pany was in prosperity. The consumption of the porcelain of China, 
of the spiceries of the Moluccas, of the piece goods of Bengal, and 
of innumerable other articles, has increased very nearly in a like 
proportion. The tonnage accordingly of all the European shipping 
employed in the East India trade, at any one time during the last 
century, was not, perhaps, much greater than that of the English 
East India Company before the late reduction of their shipping.^®® 
But in the East Indies, particularly in China and Indostan, the 
value of the precious metals, when the Europeans first began to 
trade to those countries, was much higher than in Europe; and it 
still continues to be so. In rice countries, which generally yield two, 
sometimes three crops in the year, each of them more plentiful than 
any common crop of corn, the abundance of food must be much 
greater than in any corn country of equal extent. Such countries are 
accordingly much more populous. In them too the rich, having a 
greater super-abundance of food to dispose of beyond what they 
themselves can consume, have the means of purchasing a much 
greater quantity of the labour of other people. The retinue of a 
grandee in China or Indostan accordingly is, by all accounts, much 
more numerous and splendid than that of the richest subjects in Eu- 
rope. The same super-abundance of food, of which they have the 
disposal, enables them to give a greater quantity of it for all those 
singular and rare productions which nature furnishes but in very 
small quantities; such as the precious metals and the precious 
stones, the great objects of the competition of the rich. Though the 
mines, therefore, which supplied the Indian market had been as 
abundant as those which supplied the European, such commodities 
would naturally exchange for a greater quantity of food in India 

“In order to prevent the great consumption of timber fit for the con- 
struction of large ships of war, the East India Company were prohibited from 
building, or allowing to be built for their service, any new ships, till the ship- 
ping in their employment should be reduced under 45,000 tons, or employing 
any ships built after i8th March, 1772. But they are at liberty to build any 
vessel whatever in India or the colonies, or to charter any vessel built in In- 
dia or the colonies, 12 Geo. III., c. 54.” — ^Macpherson, Annals of Commerce, 
1805, A.D. 1772, vol. iii., pp. 521, S22. 


where the 
value of 
gold and 
silver was, 
and still 
is, higher 
than in 
Europe. 



2o6 the wealth of NATIONS 

than in Europe. But the mines which supplied the Indian market 
with the precious metals seem to have been a good deal less abun- 
dant, and those which supplied it with the precious stones a good 
deal more so, than the mines which supplied the European. The 
precious metals, therefore, would naturally exchange in India for 
somewhat a greater quantity of the precious stones, and for a much 
greater quantity of food than in Europe. The money price of 
diamonds, the greatest of all superfluities, would be somewhat 
lower, and that of food, the first of all necessaries, a great deal lower 
in the one country than in the other. But the real price of labour, 
the real quantity of the necessaries of life which is given to the la- 
bourer, it has already been observed,^^^ is lower both in China and 
Indostan, the two great markets of India, than it is through the 
greater part of Europe. The wages of the labourer will there pur- 
chase a smaller quantity of food; and as the money price of food is 
much lower in India than in Europe, the money price of labour is 
there lower upon a double account; upon account both of the small 
quantity of food which it will purchase, and of the low price of that 
food. But in countries of equal art and industry, the money price of 
the greater part of manufactures will be in proportion to the money 
price of labour; and in manufacturing art and industry, China and 
Indostan, though inferor, seem not to be much inferior to any part 
of Europe. The money price of the greater part of manufactures, 
therefore, will naturally be much lower in those great empires than 
it is any-where in Europe. Through the greater part of Europe too 
the expence of land-carriage increases very much both the real and 
nominal price of most manufactures. It costs more labour, and 
therefore more money, to bring first the materials, and afterwards 
the complete manufacture to market. In China and Indostan the 
extent and variety of inland navigations save the greater part of 
this labour, and consequently of this money, and thereby reduce 
still lower both the real and the nominal price of the greater part of 
their manufactures. Upon all these accounts, the precious metals are 
a commodity which it always has been, and still continues to be, 
extremely advantageous to carry from Europe to India. There is 
scarce any commodity which brings a better price there; or which, 
in proportion to the quantity of labour and commodities which it 
costs in Europe, will purchase or command a greater quantity of la- 
bour and commodities in India. It is more advantageous too to carry 
silver thither than gold ; because in China, and the greater part of 
the other markets of India, the proportion between fine silver and 

^ Ed. I places “in India” here instead of in the line above. 

Above, p. 73 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 207 

fine gold is but as ten, or at most as twelve, to one; whereas in 
Europe it is as fourteen or fifteen to one. In China, and the greater 
part of the other markets of India, ten, or at most twelve, ounces of 
silver will purchase an ounce of gold; in Europe it requires from 
fourteen to fifteen ounces. In the cargoes, therefore, of the greater 
part of European ships which sail to India, silver has generally been 
one of the most valuable articles. It is the most valuable article 
m the Acapulco ships which sail to Manilla. The silver of the new 
continent seems in this manner to be one of the principal commodi- 
ties by which the commerce between the two extremities of the 
old one is carried on, and it is by means of it, in a great measure, 
that those distant parts of the world are connected with one an- 
other. 

In order to supply so very widely extended a market, the quan- The sup- 
tity of silver annually brought from the mines must not only be 0^ sil- 
sufficient to support that continual increase both of coin and of pro^d^ 
plate which is required in all thriving countries; but to repair that for waste 
continual waste and consumption of silver which takes place in all well as 

* ^ l]lCr63S& 

countries where that metal is used. of plate 

The continual consumption of the precious metals in coin by and coin, 
wearing, and in plate both by wearing and cleaning, is very sensible; 
and in commodities of which the use is so very widely extended, 
would alone require a very great annual supply. The consumption able, 
of those metals in some particular manufactures, though it may not 
perhaps be greater upon the whole than this gradual consumption, 
is, however, much more sensible, as it is much more rapid. In the 
manufactures of Birmingham alone, the quantity of gold and silver 
annually employed in gilding and plating, and thereby disqualified 
from ever afterwards appearing in the shape of those metals, is 
said to amount to more than fifty thousand pounds sterling. We may 
from thence form some notion how great must be the annual con- 
sumption in all the different parts of the world, either in manufac- 
tures of the same kind with those of Birmingham, or in laces, em- 
broideries, gold and silver stuffs, the gilding of books, furniture, &c. 

A considerable quantity too must be annually lost in transporting 

Ed. I does not contain “or at most as twelve” here and two lines lower 
down. 

Newton, in his Representation to the Lords of the Treasury , 1717 (re- 
printed in the Universal Merchant, quoted on the next page), says that in 
China and Japan the ratio is 9 or 10 to i and in India 12 to i, and this car- 
ries away the silver from all Europe. Magens, in a note to this passage (Z7?m- 
versal Merchant, p. 90), says that down to 1732 such quantities of silver went 
to China to fetch back gold that the price of gold in China rose and it became 
no longer profitable to send silver there. 

^^®Ed. I reads “be the principal commodity.” 


^ Ed. I reads “chiefly.’ 



Six mil- 
lions of 
^Id and 
silver are 
imported 
at Cadiz 
and Lis- 
bon, 

as shown 
by 

Magens, 


Raynal, 


208 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

those metals from one place to another both by sea and by land. 
In the greater part of the governments of Asia, besides, the almost 
universal custom of concealing treasures in the bowels of the earth, 
of which the knowledge frequently dies with the person who makes 
the concealment, must occasion the loss of a still greater quantity. 

The quantity of gold and silver imported at both Cadiz and Lis- 
bon (including not only what comes under register, but what may 
be supposed to be smuggled) amounts, according to the best ac- 
counts,^^® to about six millions sterling a year. 

According to Mr. Meggens^^® the annual importation of the 
precious metals into Spain, at an average of six years; viz. from 
1748 to 1753, both inclusive; and into Portugal, at an average of 
seven years; viz. from 1747 to 1733, both inclusive; amounted 
in silver to 1,101,107 pounds weight; and in gold to 49^940 pounds 
weight. The silver, at sixty-two shillings the pound Troy, amounts 
to 3,413,431/. 10^.^^® sterling. The gold, at forty-four guineas and a 
half the pound Troy, amounts to 2,333,446/. 14^. sterling. Both to- 
gether amount to 5,746,878/. 45. sterling. The account of what was 
imported under register, he assures us is exact. He gives us the de- 
tail of the particular places from which the gold and silver were 
brought, and of the particular quantity of each metal, which, ac- 
cording to the register, each of them afforded. He makes an allow- 
ance too for the quantity of each metal which he supposes may 
have been smuggled. The great experience of this judicious mer- 
chant renders his opinion of considerable weight. 

According to the eloquent and, sometimes, well-informed Au- 


The same words are used below, p. 412. 

^"Postscript to the Universal Merchant, p. 15 and 16. This Postscript was 
not printed till 1756, three years after the publication of the book, which has 
never had a second edition. The postscript is, therefore, to be found in few 
copies: It corrects several errors in the book. This note appears first in ed. 2, 
The title of the work referred to is Farther Explanations of some particular 
subjects relating to Trade, Coin, and Exchanges, contained in the Universal 
Merchant, by N. M., 1756. On p. i N. M. claims the authorship of the book 
“published by Mr. Horsley under the too pompous title of The Universal 
Merchant” In the dedication of The Universal Merchant, 1753, William 
Horsley, the editor, says the author “though an alien by birth is an English- 
man by interest.” Sir James Steuart, who calls him “Mr. Megens,” says he 
lived long in England and wrote the Universal Merchant in German, from 
which it had been translated {Inquiry into the Principles of Political Econ- 
omy, vol. ii., pp. 158, 292). The Gentleman’s Magazine for August, 1764, 
p. 398, contains in the obituary, under date August 18, 1764, “Nicolas Magens 
Esq. a merchant worth £100,000.” 

^^“^The two periods are really five years, April, 1748, to April, 1753, and six 
years, January, 1747, to January, 1753, but the averages are correct, being 
taken from Magens. 

The los. here should be 14s., and two lines lower down the 14s. should 
be los. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 209 

thor of the Philosophical and Political History of the Establishment 
of the Europeans in the two Indies, the annual importation of regis- 
tered gold and silver into Spain, at an average of eleven years; viz. 
from I7S4 to 1764, both inclusive; amounted to 13,984,185!^^^ 
piastres of ten reals. On account of what may have been smuggled, 
however, the whole annual importation, he supposes, may have 
amounted to seventeen millions of piastres; which, at 45. 6 d. the 
piastre, is equal to 3 ,82 5,000/. sterling. He gives the detail too of the 
particular places from which the gold and silver were brought, and 
of the particular quantities of each metal which, according to the 
register, each of them afforded.^®*^ He informs us too, that if we were 
to judge of the quantity of gold annually imported from the Bra- 
zils into Lisbon by the amount of the tax paid to the king of Port- 
ugal, which it seems is one-fifth of the standard metal, we might 
value it at eighteen millions of cruzadoes, or forty-five millions of 
French livres, equal to about two millions sterling. On account of 
what may have been smuggled, however, we may safely, he says, 
add to this sum an eighth more, or 250,000/. sterling, so that the 
whole will amount to 2,250,000/. sterling.^®^ According to this ac- 
count, therefore, the whole annual importation of the precious met- 
als into both Spain and Portugal, amounts to about 6,075,000/. 
sterling. 

Several other very well authenticated, though manuscript,^®^ 
accounts, I have been assured, agree, in making this whole annual 
importation amount at an average to about six millions sterling; 
sometimes a little more, sometimes a little less. 

The annual importation of the precious metals into Cadiz and 
Lisbon, indeed, is not equal to the whole annual produce of the 
mines of America. Some part is sent annually by the Acapulco ships 
to Manilla; some part is employed in the contraband trade which 
the Spanish colonies carry on with those of other European na- 
tions; and some part, no doubt, remains in the country. The mines 
of America, besides, are by no means the only gold and silver 
mines in the world. They are, however, by far the most abundant. 
The produce of all the other mines which are known, is insignifi- 
cant, it is acknowledged, in comparison with theirs; and the far 
greater part of their produce, it is likewise acknowledged, is an- 
nually imported into Cadiz and Lisbon. But the consumption of 
Birmingham alone, at the rate of fifty thousand pounds a year,^®^ 

Misprinted 13,984,185! in ed. 2 and later editions 

Ra3aial, Histoire philosophigue et politique de$ itablissemens et du com- 
merce des Europeens dans les deux Indes, Amsterdam ed., i773j tom. iii., p. 310 , 

“^Raynal, Histoire philosophigue , Amsterdam ed., i 773 » tom. iii., p. 385. 

Ed. I does not contain “though manuscript.” ^ Above, p. 207. 


and other 
authors. 


This is 
not tike 
whole of 
thean-^ 
nual sup- 
ply, but 
by far 
the great- 
er part. 



Brass and 
iron in- 
crease, 
but we do 
not expect 
them to 
fall in 
value. 
Why then 
gold and 
silver ? 


Inconse- 
quence of 
their 

durability 

the 

metals, 
especially 
gold and 
silver, 
vary little 
in value 
from year 
to year. 


210 the wealth of nations 

is equal to the hundred-and-twentieth part of this annual importa- 
tion at the rate of six millions a year. The whole annual consump- 
tion of gold and silver, therefore, in all the different countries of 
the world where those metals are used, may perhaps be nearly 
equal to the whole annual produce. The remainder may be no more 
than sufficient to supply the increasing demand of all thriving 
countries. It may even have fallen so far short of this demand as 
somewhat to raise the price of those metals in the European 
market. 

The quantity of brass and iron annually brought from the mine 
to the market is out of all proportion greater than that of gold and 
silver. We do not, however, upon this account, imagine that those 
coarse metals are likely to multiply beyond the demand, or to be- 
come gradually cheaper and cheaper. Why should we imagine that 
the precious metals are likely to do so? The coarse metals, indeed, 
though harder, are put to much harder uses, and, as they are of less 
value, less care is employed in their preservation. The precious 
metals, however, are not necessarily immortal any more than they, 
but are liable too to be lost, wasted, and consumed in a great variety 
of ways. 

The price of all metals, though liable to slow and gradual varia- 
tions, varies less from year to year than that of almost any other 
part of rude produce of land; and the price of the precious metals is 
even less liable to sudden variations than that of the coarse ones. 
The durableness of metals is the foundation of this extraordinary 
steadiness of price. The com which was brought to market last year, 
will be all or almost all consumed long before the end of this year. 
But some part of the iron which was brought from the mine two or 
three hundred years ago, may be still in use, and perhaps some part 
of the gold which was brought from it two or three thousand years 
ago. The different masses of corn which in different years must sup- 
ply the consumption of the world, will always be nearly in propor- 
tion to the respective produce of those different years. But the pro- 
portion between the different masses of iron which may be in use 
in two different years, will be very little affected by any accidental 
difference in the produce of the iron mines of those two years; and 
the proportion between the masses of gold will be still less affected 
by any such difference in the produce of the gold mines. Though 
the produce of the greater part of metallic mines, therefore, varies, 
perhaps, still more from year to year than that of the greater part 
of corn-fields, those variations have not the same effect upon the 
price of the one species of commodities, as upon that of the other. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 211 

Vdridtions in the Proportion between the respective Values of Gold 
and Silver 

Before the discovery of the mines of America, the value of fine 
gold to fine silver was regulated in the different mints of Europe, 
between the proportions of one to ten and one to twelve; that is, an 
ounce of fine gold was supposed to be worth from ten to twelve 
ounces of fine silver. About the middle of the last century it came 
to be regulated, between the proportions of one to fourteen and one 
to fifteen; that is, an ounce of fine gold came to be supposed worth 
between fourteen and fifteen ounces of fine silver. Gold rose in its 
nominal value, or in the quantity of silver which was given for it. 
Both metals sunk in their real value, or in the quantity of labour 
which they could purchase; but silver sunk more than gold. Though 
both the gold and silver mines of America exceeded in fertility all 
those which had ever been known before, the fertility of the silver 
mines had, it seems, been proportionably still greater than that of 
the gold ones. 

The great quantities of silver carried annually from Europe to 
India, have, in some of the English settlements, gradually reduced 
the value of that metal in proportion to gold. In the mint of Cal- 
cutta, an ounce of fine gold is supposed to be worth fifteen ounces 
of fine silver, in the same manner as in Europe. It is in the mint 
perhaps rated too high for the value which it bears in the market 
of Bengal. In China, the proportion of gold to silver still continues 
as one to ten, or one to twelve.^®^ In Japan, it is said to be as one 
to eight.^®® 

The proportion between the quantities of gold and silver an- 
nually imported into Europe, according to Mr. Meggen’s account, 
is as one to twenty-two nearly; that is, for one ounce of gold 
there are imported a little more than twenty-two ounces of silver. 
The great quantity of silver sent annually to the East Indies, re- 
duces, he supposes, the quantities of those metals which remain in 
Europe to the proportion of one to fourteen or fifteen, the propor- 
tion of their values. The proportion between their values, he seems 
to think,^®*^ must necessarily be the same as that between their 

Ed. I does not contain “or one to twelve.” 

Cantillon gives one to ten for China and one to eight for Japan, Essai^ p. 

36s 

Above, pp. 208, 209. The exact figure given by Magens, Farther Ea:- 
planations, p. 16, is i to 22 yV* 

^ Ibid., p. 17. 


After the 
discovery 
of the 
American 
mipes sil- 
ver fell in 
propor- 
tion to 
gold. 


It is high- 
er in the 
East. 


Magens 
seems to 
think the 
propor- 
tion of 
value 
should be 
the same 
as the 
propor- 
tion of 
quantity, 



212 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


but this 
is absurd. 


The whole 
of a cheap 
commod- 
ity is 

commonly 
worth 
more than 
the whole 
of a dear 
one, and 
this is the 
case 'with 
silver and 
gold. 


quantities, and would therefore be as one to twenty-two, were it not 
for this greater exportation of silver. 

But the ordinary proportion between the respective values of two 
commodities is not necessarily the same as that between the quanti- 
ties of them which are commonly in the market. The price of an 
ox, reckoned at ten guineas, is about threescore times the price of a 
lamb, reckoned at 35. 6 d, It would be absurd, however, to infer from 
thence, that there are commonly in the market threescore lambs for 
one ox: and it would be just as absurd to infer, because an ounce of 
gold will commonly purchase from fourteen to fifteen ounces of sil- 
ver^ that there are commonly in the market only fourteen or fifteen 
ounces of silver for one ounce of gold. 

The quantity of silver commonly in the market, it is probable, is 
much greater in proportion to that of gold, than the value of a cer- 
tain quantity of gold is to that of an equal quantity of silver. The 
whole quantity of a cheap commodity brought to market, is com- 
monly not only greater, but of greater value, than the whole quan- 
tity of a dear one. The whole quantity of bread annually brought 
to market, is not only greater, but of greater value than the whole 
quantity of butcher ’s-meat; the whole quantity of butcher^s-meat, 
than the whole quantity of poultry; and the whole quantity of 
poultry, than the whole quantity of wild fowl. There are so many 
more purchases for the cheap than for the dear commodity, that, 
not only a greater quantity of it, but a greater value, can commonly 
be disposed of. The whole quantity, therefore, of the cheap com- 
modity must commonly be greater in proportion to the whole 
quantity of the dear one, than the value of a certain quantity of 
the dear one, is to the value of an equal quantity of the cheap one. 
When we compare the precious metis with one another, silver is a 
cheap, and gold a dear commodity. We ought naturally to expect, 
therefore, that there should always be in the market, not only a 
greater quantity, but a greater value of silver than of gold. Let any 
man, who has a little of both, compare his own silver with his gold 
plate, and he will probably find, that, not only the quantity, but 
the value of the former greatly exceeds that of the latter. Many 
people, besides, have a good deal of silver who have no gold plate, 
which, even with those who have it, is generally confined to watch- 
cases, snuff-boxes, and such like trinkets, of which the whole 
amount is seldom of great value. In the British coin, indeed, the 
value of the gold preponderates greatly, but it is not so in that of 
all countries. In the coin of some countries the value of the two 
metals is nearly equal. In the Scotch coin, before tbe union with 
England, the gold preponderated very little, though it did some- 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 213 

what,^®® as it appears by the accounts of the mint. In the coin of 
many countries the silver preponderates. In France, the largest 
sums are commonly paid in that metal, and it is there difficult to 
get more gold than what is necessary to carry about in your poc- 
ket. The superior value, however, of the silver plate above that of 
the gold, which takes place in all countries, will much more than 
compensate the preponderancy of the gold coin above the silver, 
which takes place only in some countries. 

Though, in one sense of the word, silver always has been, and 
probably always will be, much cheaper than gold; yet in another 
sense, gold may, perhaps, in the present state of the Spanish 
market, be said to be somewhat cheaper than silver. A commodity 
may be said to be dear or cheap, not only according to the abso- 
lute greatness or smallness of its usual price, but according as that 
price is more or less above the lowest for which it is possible to 
bring it to market for any considerable time together. This lowest 
price is that which barely replaces, with a moderate profit, the 
stock which must be employed in bringing the commodity thither. 
It is the price which affords nothing to the landlord, of which rent 
makes not any component part, but which resolves itself altogether 
into wages and profit. But, in the present state of the Spanish 
market, gold is certainly somewhat nearer to this lowest price than 
silver. The tax of the King of Spain upon gold is only one-twen- 
tieth part of the standard metal, or five per cent.; whereas his tax 
upon silver amounts to one-tenth part of it, or to ten per cent.^®^ 
In these taxes too, it has already been observed,^®^ consists the 
whole rent of the greater part of the gold and silver mines of Span- 
ish America; and that upon gold is still worse paid than that upon 
silver. The profits of the undertakers of gold mines too, as they 
more rarely make a fortune, must, in general, be still more mod- 
erate than those of the undertakers of silver mines.^®^ The price of 
Spanish gold, therefore, as it affords both less rent and less profit, 
must, in the Spanish market, be somewhat nearer to the lowest 
price for which it is possible to bring it thither, than the price of 


^“See Ruddiman’s Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata, &c. Scotiae. Selectus 
diplomatum et numismatum thesaurus (quoted above, p. 183), pp. 84, 85 ; and 
in the translation, pp. 175, 176. But the statement that gold preponderated is 
founded merely on the fact that the value of the gold coined in the periods 
i6th December, 1602, to 19th July, 1606, and 20th September, 1611, to 14th 
April, 1613, was greater than that of the silver coined in the same time, which 
proves nothing about the proportions in the whole stock of coin. The state- 
ment is repeated below, p. 281. The note appears first in ed. 2. 

“®Ed. I reads “European.” ^^Ed. i reads “European.” 

“^Ed. I reads “one fifth part of it, or to twenty per cent.” 

Above, pp. 168, 201. Above, p. 170. “‘Ed. i reads “European.” 


Gold is 
nearer its 
lowest 
possible 
price than 
silver. 



-^4 the wealth of nations 


Diamonds 
are nearer 
still 

It may be 
necessary 
to reduce 
still fur- 
ther the 
tax on sil- 
ver in 
Spanish 
America 


Ed I places the “it would seem” after “computed,” omits “in the Span- 
ish market,” and puts the whole sentence at the end of the paragraph. 

Ed. I places the “indeed” here Ed. i reads “that.” 

Above, p. 209. 

Ed. I reads “It must still be true, however, that the whole mass of Am- 
erican gold comes to the European market at a price.” 

Ed. I contains another paragraph, “Were the king of Spain to give up his 
tax upon silver, the price of that metal might not, upon that account, sink im- 
mediately in the European m^ket As long as the quantity brought thither 
continued the same as before, it would still continue to sell at the same price. 
The first and immediate effect of this change, would be to increase the profits 
of mining, the pdertaker of the mine now gaining all that he had been used 
to pay to the king These great profits would soon tempt a greater number of 
people to undertake the working of new mines. Many mines would be wrought 
which cannot be wrought at present, because they cannot afford to pay this 
tax, and the quantity of silver brought to market would, in a few years be so 
much augmented, probably, as to sink its price about one-fifth below its 
present standaid. This diminution in the value of silver would again reduce 
the profits of mining nearly to their present rate ” 

Above, pp. 169, 202. 

^'^Ed I reads from the beginning of the paragraph, “It is not indeed very 
probable, ^ that any part of a tax which affords so important a revenue, and 
which IS imposed, too, upon one of the most proper subjects of taxation, will 
ever be given up as long as it is possible to pay it The impossibility of paying 
It, however, may in time make it necessary to diminish it, in the same manner 
as it made it necessary to diminish the tax upon gold ” 


Spanish silver. When all expences are computed, the whole quan- 
tity of the one metal, it would seem, cannot, in the Spanish mar- 
ket, be disposed of so advantageously as the whole quantity of the 
other.^®'^ The tax, indeed, of the King of Portugal upon the 
gold of the Brazils, is the same with the ancient tax of the King 
of Spain upon the silver of Mexico and Peru; or one-fifth part of 
the standard metal.^®^ It may, therefore, be uncertain whether to 
the general market of Europe the whole mass of American gold 
comes at a price nearer to the lowest for which it is possible to 
bring it thither, than the whole mass of American silver. 

The price of diamonds and other precious stones may, perhaps, 
be still nearer to the lowest price at which it is possible to bring 
them to market, than even the price of gold.^'^® 

Though it is not very profitable, that any part of a tax which is 
not only imposed upon one of the most proper subjects of taxation, 
a mere luxury and superfluity, but which affords so very important 
a revenue, as the tax upon silver, will ever be given up as long as it 
is possible to pay it; yet the same impossibility of paying it, which 
in 1736 made it necessary to reduce it from one-fifth to one- 
tenth, may in time make it necessary to reduce it still further; 
in the same manner as it made it necessary to reduce the tax upon 
gold to one-twentieth .^'^2 That the silver mines of Spanish America, 
like all other mines, becomes gradually more expensive in the work- 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 215 

ingj on account of the greater depths at which it is necessary to 
carry on the works, and of the greater expence of drawing out the 
water and of supplying them with fresh air at those depths, is ac- 
knowledged by every body who has enquired into the state of those 
mines. 

These causes, which are equivalent to a growing scarcity of sil- 
ver (for a commodity may be said to grow scarcer when it becomes 
more difficult and expensive to collect a certain quantity of it), 
must, in time, produce one or other of the three following events. 
The increase of the expence must either, first, be compensated al- 
together by a proportionable increase in the price of the metal; or, 
secondly, it must be compensated altogether by a proportionable 
diminution of the tax upon silver; or, thirdly, it must be compen- 
sated partly by the one, and partly by the other of those two ex- 
pedients. This third event is very possible. As gold rose in its price 
in proportion to silver, notwithstanding a great diminution of the 
tax upon gold; so silver might rise in its price in proportion to la- 
bour and commodities, notwithstanding an equal diminution of the 
tax upon silver. 

Such successive reductions of the tax, however, though they may 
not prevent altogether, must certainly retard, more or less, the rise 
of the value of silver in the European market. In consequence of 
such reductions, many mines may be wrought which could not be 
wrought before, because they could not afford to pay the old tax; 
and the quantity of silver annually brought to market must always 
be somewhat greater, and, therefore, the value of any given quan- 
tity somewhat less, than it otherwise would have been. In conse- 
quence of the reduction in 1736, the value of silver in the Euro- 
pean market, though it may not at this day be lower than before 
that reduction, is, probably, at least ten per cent, lower than it 
would have been, had the Court of Spain continued to exact the old 

tax.1^3 

That, notwithstanding this reduction, the value of silver has, 
during the course of the present century, begun to rise somewhat in 
the European market, the facts and arguments which have been al- 
leged above, dispose me to believe, or more properly to suspect and 
conjecture; for the best opinion which I can form upon this subject 
scarce, perhaps, deserves the name of belief. The rise, indeed, sup- 
posing there has been any, has hitherto been so very small, that 

This paragraph appears first in ed. 2. 

Ed I reads from the beginning of the paragraph, “That the first of these 
three events has already begun to take place, or that silver has, during the 
course of the present century, begun to rise somewhat in its value in the Eu- 


The great- 
er cost of 
raising sil- 
ver must 
lead to an 
increase of 
its price, 
or a re- 
duction 
of the tax 
upon it, or 
both. 


The re- 
duction of 
the tax in 
the past 
makes sil- 
ver at 
least 10 
per cent, 
lower 
than it 
would 
otherwise 
have been. 


Silver has 
probably 
risen 

somewhat 
in the 
present 
century. 



The an- 
nual con- 
sumption 
must at 
length 
equal the 
annual 
importa- 
tion, 


and will 
then ac- 
commo- 
date itself 
to chang- 
es in the 
importa- 
tion. 


Gold and 
silver are 
supposed 
to be still 
falling be- 
cause they 
arein- 
creasingin 
quantity 
and some 
sorts of 
rude pro- 


216 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

after all that has been said, it may, perhaps, appear to many peo- 
ple uncertain, not only whether this event has actually taken place; 
but whether the contrary may not have taken place, or whether the 
value of silver may not still continue to fall in the European market. 

It must be observed, however, that whatever may be the supposed 
annual importation of gold and silver, there must be a certain 
period, at which the annual consumption of those metals will be 
equal to that annual importation. Their consumption must increase 
as their mass increases, or rather in a much greater proportion. As 
their mass increases, their value diminishes. They are more used, 
and less cared for, and their consumption consequently increases in 
a greater proportion than their mass. After a certain period, there- 
fore, the annual consumption of those metals must, in this manner, 
become equal to their annual importation, provided that importa- 
tion is not continually increasing; which, in the present times, is 
not supposed to be the case. 

If, when the annual consumption has become equal to the annual 
importation, the annual importation should gradually diminish, the 
annual consumption may, for some time, exceed the annual im- 
portation. The mass of those metals may gradually and insensibly 
diminish, and their value gradually and insensibly rise, till the an- 
nual importation becoming again stationary, the annual consump- 
tion will gradually and insensibly accommodate itself to what that 
annual importation can maintain.^*^^ 

Grounds of the Suspicion that the Value of Silver still continues to 

decrease 

The increase of the wealth of Europe, and the popular notion that, 
as the quantity of the precious metals naturally increases with the 
increase of wealth, so their value diminishes as their quantity in- 
creases, may, perhaps, dispose many people to believe that their 
value still continues to fall in the European market; and the still 
gradually increasing price of many parts of the rude produce of 
land may confirm them still further in this opinion. 

That that increase in the quantity of the precious metals, 
which arises in any country from the increase of wealth, has no 

ropean market, the facts and arguments which have been alledged above dis- 
pose me to believe. The rise, indeed, has hitherto ” 

The last two paragraphs appear first in Additions and Corrections and 
ed. 3 

Ed. I reads “may besides” Ed. i reads “perhaps” here. 

Ed. I reads “That the increase of.” 

Ed. I places the “which arises” here. 



217 


DIGRESSION ON SILVER 

tendency to diminish their value, I have endeavoured to show al- 
ready.^®^ Gold and silver naturally resort to a rich country, for the 
same reason that all sorts of luxuries and curiosities resort to it; 
not because they are cheaper there than in poorer countries, but 
because they are dearer, or because a better price is given for them. 
It is the superiority of price which attracts them, and as soon as 
that superiority ceases, they necessarily cease to go thither. 

If you except corn and such other vegetables as are raised alto- 
gether by human industry, that all other sorts of rude produce, cat- 
tle, poultry, game of all kinds, the useful fossils and minerals of the 
earth, &c. naturally grow dearer as the society advances in wealth 
and improvement, I have endeavoured to show already Though 
such commodities, therefore, come to exchange for a greater quan- 
tity of silver than before, it will not from thence follow that silver 
has become really cheaper, or will purchase less labour than before, 
but that such commodities have become really dearer, or will pur- 
chase more labour than before. It is not their nominal price only, 
but their real price which rises in the progress of improvement. The 
rise of their nominal price is the effect, not of any degradation of 
the value of silver, but of the rise in their real price. 


Different Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon three differ- 
ent Sorts of rude Produce 

These different sorts of rude produce may be divided into three The real 
classes. The first comprehends those which it is scarce in the power 
of human industry to multiply at all. The second, those which it can sorts of 
multiply in proportion to the demand. The third, those in which rudepro- 
the efficacy of industry is either limited or uncertain. In the prog- 
ress of wealth and improvement, the real price of the first may rise progress 

to any degree of extravagance, and seems not to be limited by any of ini- 

certain boundary. That of the second, though it may rise greatly, 
has, however, a certain boundary beyond which it cannot well pass 
for any considerable time together. That of the third, though its 
natural tendency is to rise in the progress of improvement, yet in 
the same degree of improvement it may sometimes happen even to 
fall, sometimes to continue the same, and sometimes to rise more or 
less, according as different accidents render the efforts of human 
industry, in multiplying this sort of rude produce, more or less suc- 
cessful. 

Above, p. i 88 ff. Above, pp. 174-176. 


duce are 
rising 

It has al- 
ready 
been 
shown 
that the 
increase of 
the metals 
need not 
diminish 
their 
value 

and the 
rise of 
cattle, 
etc, is 
due to a 
rise in 
their real 
price, not 
to a fall 
of silver 



2I8 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


(i) The 
sort 
which 
cannot be 
multiplied 
by human 
industry, 
such as 
game. 


First Sort 

The first sort of nide produce of which the price rises in the prog- 
ress of improvement, is that which it is scarce in the power of hu- 
man industry to multiply at all. It consists in those things which 
nature produces only in certain quantities, and which being of a 
very perishable nature, it is impossible to accumulate together the 
produce of many different seasons. Such are the greater part of 
rare and singular birds and fishes, many different sorts of game, al- 
most all wild-fowl, all birds of passage in particular, as well as many 
other things. When wealth and the luxury which accompanies it 
increase, the demand for these is likely to increase with them, and 
no effort of human industry may be able to increase the supply 
much beyond what it was before this increase of the demand. The 
quantity of such commodities, therefore, remaining the same, or 
nearly the same, while the competition to purchase them is con- 
tinually increasing, their price may rise to any degree of extrava- 
gance, and seems not to be limited by any certain boundary. If 
woodcocks should become so fashionable as to sell for twenty guin- 
eas a-piece, no effort of human industry could increase the number 
of those brought to market, much beyond what it is at present. The 
high price paid by the Romans, in the time of their greatest grand- 
eur, for rare birds and fishes, may in this manner easily be ac- 
counted for. These prices were not the effects of the low value of 
silver in those times, but of the high value of such rarities and 
curiosities as human industry could not multiply at pleasure. The 
real value of silver was higher at Rome, for some time before and 
after the fall of the republic, than it is through the greater part of 
Europe at present. Three sestertii, equal to about sixpence sterling, 
was the price which the republic paid for the modius or peck of the 
tithe wheat of Sicily. This price, however, was probably below the 
average market price, the obligation to deliver their wheat at this 
rate being considered as a tax upon the Sicilian farmers. When the 
Romans, therefore, had occasion to order more corn than the tithe 
of wheat amounted to, they were bound by capitulation to pay for 
the surplus at the rate of four sestertii, or eight-pence sterling, the 
peck; and this had probably been reckoned the moderate and 
reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average contract price of those 
times; it is equal to about one-and-twenty shillings the quarter. 
Eight-and-twenty shillings the quarter was, before the late years of 

As mentioned above, p. 150. Cicero, In Verr., Act. IL, lib. iii., c. 70, is the 
authority. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 219 

scarcity, the ordinary contract price of English wheat, which in 
quality is inferior to the Sicilian, and generally sells for a lower 
price in the European market. The value of silver, therefore, in 
those ancient times, must have been to its value in the present, as 
three to four inversely; that is, three ounces of silver would then 
have purchased the same quantity of labour and commodities which 
four ounces will do at present. When we read in Pliny, therefore, 
that Seius bought a white nightingale, as a present for the em- 
press Agrippina, at the price of six thousand sestertii, equal to about 
fifty pounds of our present money; and that Asinius Celer pur- 
chased a surmullet at the price of eight thousand sestertii, equal to 
about sixty-six pounds thirteen shillings and four-pence of our pres- 
ent money; the extravagance of those prices, how much soever it 
may surprise us, is apt, notwithstanding, to appear to us about one- 
third less than it really was. Their real price, the quantity of labour 
and subsistence which was given away for them, was about one- 
third more than their nominal price is apt to express to us in the 
present times. Seius gave for the nightingale the command of a 
quantity of labour and subsistence equal to what 66^. 135. 
would purchase in the present times; and Asinius Celer gave for 
the surmullet the command of a quantity equal to what 88/. 17^. 
pd.-l, would purchase. What occasioned the extravagance of 
those high prices was, not so much the abundance of silver, as the 
abundance of labour and subsistence, of which those Romans had 
the disposal, beyond what was necessary for their own use. The 
quantity of silver, of which they had the disposal, was a good deal 
less than what the command of the same quantity of labour and sub- 
sistence would have procured to them in the present times. 


Second Sort 

The second sort of rude produce of which the price rises in the (2) The 
progress of improvement, is that which human industry can multi- 
ply in proportion to the demand. It consists in those useful plants bemulti- 
and animals, which, in uncultivated countries, nature produces with 
such profuse abundance, that they are of little or no value, and ^ttie,^ 
which, as cultivation advances, are therefore forced to give place to poultry, 
some more profitable produce. During a long period in the progress 
of improvement, the quantity of these is continually diminishing, 
while at the same time the demand for them is continually increas- 

^ Lib. X. c. 29. “Scio sestertiis sex candidam alioquin, quod est prope in- 
usitatum, venisse, quae Agrippinae Claudii prindpis conjugi dono daretur.” 

“Seius” seems to be the result of misreading “Sdo.” 

’^Lib. ix. c. 17. This and the previous note appear first in ed. 2 . 



When it 
becomes 
profitable 
to culti- 
vate land 
to yield 
food for 
cattle, the 
price of 
cattle can- 
not go 
higher. 


It must go 
to this 


220 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ing. Their real value, therefore, the real quantity of labour which 
they will purchase or command, gradually rises, till at last it gets 
so high as to render them as profitable a produce as any thing else 
which human industry can raise upon the most fertile and best cul- 
tivated land. When it has got so high it cannot well go higher. If it 
did, more land and more industry would soon be employed to in- 
crease their quantity. 

When the price of cattle, for example, rises so high that it is as 
profitable to cultivate land in order to raise food for them, as in or- 
der to raise food for man, it cannot well go higher. If it did, more 
corn land would soon be turned into pasture. The extension of till- 
age, by diminishing the quantity of wild pasture, diminishes the 
quantity of butcher’s-meat which the country naturally produces 
without labour or cultivation, and by increasing the number of 
those who have either corn, or, what comes to the same thing, the 
price of corn, to give in exchange for it, increases the demand. The 
price of butcher’s-meat, therefore, and consequently of cattle, must 
gradually rise till it gets so high, that it becomes as profitable to 
employ the most fertile and best cultivated lands in raising food for 
them as in raising corn. But it must always be late in the progress of 
improvement before tillage can be so far extended as to raise the 
price of cattle to this height; and till it has got to this height, if the 
country is advancing at all, their price must be continually rising. 
There are, perhaps, some parts of Europe in which the price of cat- 
tle has not yet got to this height. It had not got to this height in any 
part of Scotland before the union.^®® Had the Scotch cattle been al- 
ways confined to the market of Scotland, in a country in which the 
quantity of land, which can be applied to no other purpose but the 
feeding of cattle, is so great in proportion to what can be applied to 
other purposes, it is scarce possible, perhaps, that their price could 
ever have risen so high as to render it profitable to cultivate land 
for the sake of feeding them. In England, the price of cattle, it has 
already been observed,^®® seems, in the neighbourhood of London, 
to have got to this height about the beginning of the last century; 
but it was much later probably before it got to it through the greater 
part of the remoter counties; in some of which, perhaps, it may 
scarce yet have got to it. Of all the different substances, however, 
which compose this second sort of rude produce, cattle is, perhaps, 
that of which the price, in the progress of improvement, first rises 
to this height. 

Till the price of cattle, indeed, has got to this height, it seems 
scarce possible that the greater part, even of those lands which are 

Above, pp. 149, 162. Above, p. 151, and cp. below, p. 225, 



221 


DIGRESSION ON SILVER 

capable of the highest cultivation, can be completely cultivated. In height in 
all farms too distant from any town to carry manure from it, that 

is, in the far greater part of those of every extensive country, the complete 
quantity of well-cultivated land must be in proportion to the quan- cultiva- 
tity of manure which the farm itself produces; and this again must 

be in proportion to the stock of cattle which are maintained upon 

it. The land is manured either by pasturing the cattle upon it, or 
by feeding them in the stable, and from thence carrying out their 
dung to it. But unless the price of the cattle be sufficient to pay 
both the rent and profit of cultivated land, the farmer cannot afford 
to pasture them upon it; and he can still less afford to feed them in 
the stable. It is with the produce of improved and cultivated land 
only, that cattle can be fed in the stable; because to collect the 
scanty and scattered produce of waste and unimproved lands would 
require too much labour and be too expensive. If the price of the 
cattle, therefore, is not sufficient to pay for the produce of im- 
proved and cultivated land, when they are allowed to pasture it, 
that price will be still less sufficient to pay for that produce when 
it must be collected with a good deal of additional labour, and 
brought into the stable to them. In these circumstances, therefore, 
no more cattle can, with profit, be fed in the stable than what are 
necessary for tillage. But these can never afford manure enough for 
keeping constantly in good condition, all the lands which they are 
capable of cultivating. What they afford being insufficient for the 
whole farm, will naturally be reserved for the lands to which it can 
be most advantageously or conveniently applied; the most fertile, 
or those, perhaps, in the neighbourhood of the farm-yard. These, 
therefore, will be kept constantly in good condition and fit for till- 
age. The rest will, the greater part of them, be allowed to lie waste, 
producing scarce any thing but some miserable pasture, just suffi- 
cient to keep alive a few straggling, half-starved cattle; the farm, 
though much understocked in proportion to what would be neces- 
sary for its complete cultivation, being very frequently overstocked 
in proportion to its actual produce. A portion of this waste land, 
however, after having been pastured in this wretched manner for 
six or seven years together, may be ploughed up, when it will yield, 
perhaps, a poor crop or two of bad oats, or of some other coarse 
grain, and then, being entirely exhausted, it must be rested and 
pastured again as before, and another portion ploughed up to be 
in the same manner exhausted and rested again in its turn. Such ac- 
cordingly was the general system of management all over the low 
country of Scotland before the union. The lands which were kept 
constantly well manured and in good condition, seldom exceeded a 



Conse- 
quently 
new colo- 
nies are 
poorly 


222 the wealth of nations 

third or a fourth part of the whole farm, and sometimes did not 
amount to a fifth or a sixth part of it. The rest were never manured, 
but a certain portion of them was in its turn, notwithstanding, regu- 
larly cultivated and exhausted. Under this system of management, 
it is evident, even that part of the lands of Scotland which is cap- 
able of good cultivation, could produce but little in comparison of 
what it may be capable of producing. But how disadvantageous so- 
ever this system may appear, yet before the union the low price of 
cattle seems to have rendered it almost unavoidable. If, notwith- 
standing a great rise in their price, it still continues to prevail 
through a considerable part of the country, it is owing, in many 
places, no doubt, to ignorance and attachment to old customs, but 
in most places to the unavoidable obstructions which the natural 
course of things opposes to the immediate or speedy establishment 
of a better system: first, to the poverty of the tenants, to their not 
having yet had time to acquire a stock of cattle sufficient to culti- 
vate their lands more completely, the same rise of price which 
would render it advantageous for them to maintain a greater stock, 
rendering it more difficult for them to acquire it; and, secondly, to 
their not having yet had time to put their lands in condition to 
maintain this greater stock properly, supposing they were capable 
of acquiring it. The increase of stock and the improvement of land 
are two events which must go hand in hand, and of which the one 
can no-where much out-run the other. Without some increase of 
stock, there can be scarce any improvement of land, but there can 
be no considerable increase of stock but in consequence of a con- 
siderable improvement of land; because otherwise the land could 
not maintain it. These natural obstructions to the establishment of 
a better system, cannot be removed but by a long course of fru- 
gality and industry; and half a century or a century more, perhaps, 
must pass away before the old system, which is wearing out gradu- 
ally, can be completely abolished through all the different parts 
of the country. Of all the commercial advantages, however, 
which Scotland has derived from the union with England, this rise 
in the price of cattle is, perhaps, the greatest. It has not only 
raised the value of all highland estates, but it has, perhaps, been 
the principal cause of the improvement of the low country. 

In all new colonies the great quantity of waste land, which can 
for many years be applied to no other purpose but the feeding of 
cattle, soon renders them extremely abundant, and in every thing 
great cheapness is the necessary consequence of great abundance. 
Though all the cattle of the European colonies in America were 


Eds. 1-3 read “of all commercial’ 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 223 

originally carried from Europe, they soon multiplied so much there, cultivat- 
and became of so little value, that even horses were allowed to run 
wild in the woods without any owner thinking it worth while to 
claim them. It must be a long time after the first establishment of 
such colonies, before it can become profitable to feed cattle upon 
the produce of cultivated land. The same causes, therefore, the 
want of manure, and the disproportion between the stock employed 
in cultivation, and the land which it is destined to cultivate, are 
likely to introduce there a system of husbandry not unlike that 
which still continues to take place in so many parts of Scotland. 

Mr. Kalm, the Swedish traveller, when he gives an account of the 
husbandry of some of the English colonies in North America, as he 
found it in 1749, observes, accordingly, that he can with difficulty 
discover there the character of the English nation, so well skilled in 
all the different branches of agriculture. They make scarce any 
manure for their corn fields, he says; but when one piece of ground 
has been exhausted by continual cropping, they clear and cultivate 
another piece of fresh land; and when that is exhausted, proceed to 
a third. Their cattle are allowed to wander through the woods and 
other uncultivated grounds, where they are half-starved; having 
long ago extirpated almost all the annud grasses by cropping them 
too early in the spring, before they had time to form their flowers, 
or to shed their seeds.^®® The annual grasses were, it seems, the best 
natural grasses in that part of North America; and when the Euro- 
peans first settled there, they used to grow very thick, and to rise 
three or four feet high. A piece of ground which, when he wrote, 
could not maintain one cow, would in former times, he was assured, 
have maintained four, each of which would have given four times 
the quantity of milk which that one was capable of giving. The 
poorness of the pasture had, in his opinion, occasioned the degrada- 
tion of their cattle, which degenerated sensibly from one generation 
to another. They were probably not unlike that stunted breed 
which was common all over Scotland thirty or forty years ago, and 
which is now so much mended through the greater part of the low 
country, not so much by a change of the breed, though that exped- 
ient has been employed in some places, as by a more plentiful meth- 
od of feeding them. 

Kalm’s Travels, vol. i. p. 343, 344. Travels into North America, contain- 
ing its natural history and a circumstantial account of its Plantations and Ag- 
riculture in general, with the civil, ecclesiastical and commercial state of the 
country, the manners of the inhabitants and several curious and important re- 
marks on various subjects, by Peter Kalm, Professor of (Economy in the Uni- 
versity of Aobo, in Swedish Finland, and member of the S. Royal Academy of 
Sciences. Translated by John Reinhold Forster, FA.S., 3 vols. 1770. The 
note appears first in ed. 2. 



Cattle are 
the first of 
this sec- 
ond sort 
of rude 
produce 
to bring 
in the 
price ne- 
cessary to 
secure cul- 
tivation, 

and veni- 
son is the 
last; 


other 
things are 
interme- 
diate, 


such as 
poultry, 


224 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Though it is late, therefore, in the progress of improvement be- 
fore cattle can bring such a price as to render it profitable to culti- 
vate land for the sake of feeding them; yet of all the different parts 
which compose this second sort of rude produce, they are perhaps 
the first which bring this price; because till they bring it, it seems 
impossible that improvement can be brought near even to that de- 
gree of perfection to which it has arrived in many parts of Europe. 

As cattle are among the first, so perhaps venison is among the 
last parts of this sort of rude produce which bring this price. The 
price of venison in Great Britain, how extravagant soever it may 
appear, is not near sufficient to compensate the expence of a deer 
park, as is well known to all those who have had any experience in 
the feeding of deer. If it was otherwise, the feeding of deer would 
soon become an article of common farming; in the same manner as 
the feeding of those small birds called Turdi was among the ancient 
Romans. Varro and Columella assure us that it was a most profit- 
able article.^^® The fattening of ortolans, birds of passage which ar- 
rive lean in the country, is said to be so in some parts of France. If 
venison continues in fashion, and the wealth and luxury of Great 
Britain increase as they have done for some time past, its price may 
very probably rise still higher than it is at present. 

Between that period in the progress of improvement which 
brings to its height the price of so necessary an article as cattle, and 
that which brings to it the price of such a superfluity as venison, 
there is a very long interval, in the course of which many other 
sorts of rude produce gradually arrive at their highest price, some 
sooner and some later, according to different circumstances. 

Thus in every farm the offals of the barn and stables will main- 
tain a certain number of poultry. These, as they are fed with what 
would otherwise be lost, are a mere save-all; and as they cost the 
farmer scarce any thing, so he can afford to sell them for very little. 
Almost all that he gets is pure gain, and their price can scarce be so 
low as to discourage him from feeding this number. But in coun- 
tries ill cultivated, and, therefore, but thinly inhabited, the poultry, 
which are thus raised without expence, are often fully sufficient to 
supply the whole demand. In this state of things, therefore, they 
are often as cheap as butcher’s-meat, or any other sort of anim^ 
food. But the whole quantity of poultry, which the farm in this 
manner produces without expence, must always be much smaller 
than the whole quantity of butcher’s-meat which is reared upon it; 
and in times of wealth and luxury what is rare, with only nearly 

^ Varro, De re rustica, iii., 2, and Columella, De re rustica, viii., 10, ad fin., 
where Varro is quoted. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 225 

equal merit, is always preferred to what is common. As wealth and 
luxury increase, therefore, in consequence of improvement and cul- 
tivation, the price of poultry gradually rises above that of butch- 
er’s-meat, till at last it gets so high that it becomes profitable to cul- 
tivate land for the sake of feeding them. When it has got to this 
height, it cannot well go higher. If it did, more land would soon be 
turned to this purpose. In several provinces of France, the feeding 
of poultry is considered as a very important article in rural (econ- 
omy, and sufficiently profitable to encourage the farmer to raise a 
considerable quantity of Indian corn and buck-wheat for this pur- 
pose. A middling farmer will there sometimes have four hundred 
fowls in his yard. The feeding of poultry seems scarce yet to be gen- 
erally considered as a matter of so much importance in England. 

They are certainly, however, dearer in England than in France, as 
England receives considerable supplies from France. In the prog- 
ress of improvement, the period at which every particular sort of 
animal food is dearest, must naturally be that which immediately 
precedes the general practice of cultivating land for the sake of 
raising it. For some time before this practice becomes general, the 
scarcity must necessarily raise the price. After it has become gen- 
eral, new methods of feeding are commonly fallen upon, which en- 
able the farmer to raise upon the same quantity of ground a much 
greater quantity of that particular sort of animal food. The plenty 
not only obliges him to sell cheaper, but in consequence of these 
improvements he can afford to sell cheaper; for if he could not af- 
ford it, the plenty would not be of long continuance. It has been 
probably in this manner that the introduction of clover, turnips, 
carrots, cabbages, &c. has contributed to sink the common price of 
butcher’s-meat in the London market somewhat below what it was 
about the beginning of the last century. 

The hog, that finds his food among ordure, and greedily devours hogs, 
many things rejected by every other useful animal, is, like poultry, 
originally kept as a save-all. As long as the number of such animals, 
which can thus be reared at little or no expence, is fully sufficient to 
supply the demand, this sort of butcher’s-meat comes to market at 
a much lower price than any other. But when the demand rises be- 
yond what this quantity can supply, when it becomes necessary to 
raise food on purpose for feeding and fattening hogs, in the same 
manner as for feeding and fattening other cattle, the price neces- 
sarily rises, and becomes proportionably either higher or lower than 
that of other butcher’s-meat, according as the nature of the coun- 
try, and the state of its agriculture, happen to render the feeding 
of hogs more or less expensive than that of other cattle. In France, 



milk, but- 
ter and 
cheese. 


226 the wealth of nations 

according to Mr. Buffon, the price of pork is nearly equal to that of 
hteiP^ In most parts of Great Britain it is at present somewhat 
higher. 

The great rise in the price both of hogs and poultry has in Great 
Britain been frequently imputed to the diminution of the number 
of cottagers and other small occupiers of land; an event which has 
in every part of Europe been the immediate forerunner of improve- 
ment and better cultivation, but which at the same time may have 
contributed to raise the price of those articles, both somewhat soon- 
er and somewhat faster than it would otherwise have risen. As the 
poorest family can often maintain a cat or a dog, without any ex- 
pence, so the poorest occupiers of land can commonly maintain a 
few poultry, or a sow and a few pigs, at very little. The little offals 
of their own table, their whey, skimmed milk and butter-milk, sup- 
ply those animals with a part of their food, and they find the rest 
in the neighbouring fields without doing any sensible damage to 
any body. By diminishing the number of those small occupiers, 
therefore, the quantity of this sort of provisions which is thus pro- 
duced at little or no expence, must certainly have been a good deal 
diminished, and their price must consequently have been raised 
both sooner and faster than it would otherwise have risen. Sooner 
or later, however, in the progress of improvement, it must at any 
rate have risen to the utmost height to which it is capable of rising; 
or to the price which pays the labour and expence of cultivating the 
land which furnishes them with food as well as these are paid upon 
the greater part of other cultivated land. 

The business of the dairy, like the feeding of hogs and poultry, is 
originally carried on as a save-all. The cattle necessarily kept upon 
the farm, produce more milk than either the rearing of their own 
young, or the consumption of the farmer ^s family requires; and 
they produce most at one particular season. But of all the produc- 
tions of land, milk is perhaps the most perishable. In the warm sea- 
son, when it is most abundant, it will scarce keep four-and-twenty 
hours. The farmer, by making it into fresh butter, stores a small 
part of it for a week: by making it into salt butter, for a year: and 
by making it into cheese, he stores a much greater part of it for sev- 
eral years. Part of all these is reserved for the use of his own family. 
The rest goes to market, in order to find the best price which is to 
be had, and which can scarce be so low as to discourage him from 
sending thither whatever is over and above the use of his own fam- 
ily. If it is very low, indeed, he will be likely to manage his dairy in 
a very slovenly and dirty manner, and will scarce perhaps think it 

^ Histoire Naturelle,yo\ v (1755), p 122 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 227 

worth while to have a particular room or building on purpose for it, 
but will suffer the business to be carried on amidst the smoke, filth, 
and nastiness of his own kitchen; as was the case of almost all the 
farmers dairies in Scotland thirty or forty years ago, and as is the 
case of many of them still. The same causes which gradually raise 
the price of butcher’s-meat, the increase of the demand, and, in 
consequence of the improvement of the country, the diminution of 
the quantity which can be fed at little or no expence, raise, in the 
same manner, that of the produce of the dairy, of which the price 
naturally connects with that of butcherWeat, or with the expence 
of feeding cattle. The increase of price pays for more labour, care, 
and cleanliness. The dairy becomes more worthy of the farmer’s at- 
tention, and the quality of its produce gradually improves. The 
price at last gets so high that it becomes worth while to employ 
some of the most fertile and best cultivated lands in feeding cattle 
merely for the purpose of the dairy; and when it has got to this 
height, it cannot well go higher. If it did, more land would soon be 
turned to this purpose. It seems to have got to this height through 
the greater part of England, where much good land is commonly 
employed in this manner. If you except the neighbourhood of a few 
considerable towns, it seems not yet to have got to this height any- 
where in Scotland, where common farmers seldom employ much 
good land in raising food for cattle merely for the purpose of the 
dairy. The price of the produce, though it has risen very consider- 
ably within these few years, is probably still too low to admit of it. 

The inferiority of the quality, indeed, compared with that of the 
produce of English dairies, is fully equal to that of the price. But 
this inferiority of quality is, perhaps, rather the effect of this low- 
ness of price than the cause of it. Though the quality was much 
better, the greater part of what is brought to market could not, I 
apprehend, in the present circumstances of the country, be disposed 
of at a much better price; and the present price, it is probable, 
would not pay the expence of the land and labour necessary for pro- 
ducing a much better quality. Through the greater part of England, 
notwithstanding the superiority of price, the dairy is not reckoned 
a more profitable emplo3mient of land than the raising of corn, or 
the fattening of cattle, the two great objects of agriculture. 

Through the greater part of Scotland, therefore, it cannot yet be 
even so profitable. 

The lands of no country, it is evident, can ever be completely cul- The rise 

tivated and improved, till once the price of every produce, which ^eSg ne- 

human industry is obliged to raise upon them, has got so high as to cessary 
pay for the expence of complete improvement and cultivation In for good 



cultiva- 

tion, 

should be 
regarded 
with satis- 
faction. 


It is due 
not to a 
tall of sil- 
ver but to 
a rise in 
the real 
price of 
the pro- 
duce. 


( 3 ) The 
sort in re- 
gard to 
which the 
ef&cacy of 
industry 
is limited 
or uncer- 
tain, 


e. g. wool 
and hides, 
which are 
append- 
dagesto 


228 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

order to do this, the price of each particular produce must be suf- 
ficient, first, to pay the rent of good corn land, as it is that which 
regulates the rent of the greater part of other cultivated land; and 
secondly, to pay the labour and expence of the farmer as well as 
they are commonly paid upon good corn-land; or, in other words, 
to replace with the ordinary profits the stock which he employs 
about it. This rise in the price of each particular produce, must evi- 
dently be previous to the improvement and cultivation of the land 
which is destined for raising it. Gain is the end of all improvement, 
and nothing could deserve that name of which loss was to be the 
necessary consequence. But loss must be the necessary consequence 
of improving land for the sake of a produce of which the price could 
never bring back the expence. If the complete improvement and 
cultivation of the country be, as it most certainly is, the greatest of 
all public advantages, this rise in the price of all those different 
sorts of rude produce, instead of being considered as a public ca- 
lamity, ought to be regarded as the necessary forerunner and at- 
tendant of the greatest of all public advantages. 

This rise too in the nominal or money-price of all those different 
sorts of rude produce has been the effect, not of any degradation in 
the value of silver, but of a rise in their real price. They have be- 
come worth, not only a greater quantity of silver, but a greater 
quantity of labour and subsistence than before. As it costs a greater 
quantity of labour and subsistence to bring them to market, so 
when they are brought thither, they represent or are equivalent to a 
greater quantity. 


Third Sort 

The third and last sort of rude produce, of which the price nat- 
urally rises in the progress of improvement, is that in which the ef- 
ficacy of human industry, in augmenting the quantity, is either 
limited or uncertain. Though the real price of this sort of rude 
produce, therefore, naturally tends to rise in the progress of im- 
provement, yet, according as different accidents happen to render 
the efforts of human industry more or less successful in augmenting 
the quantity, it may happen sometimes even to fall, sometimes to 
continue the same in very different periods of improvement, and 
sometimes to rise more or less in the same period. 

There are some sorts of rude produce which nature has rendered 
a kind of appendages to other sorts; so that the quantity of the one 
which any country can afford, is necessarily limited by that of the 
other. The quantity of wool or of raw hides, for example, which any 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 229 

country can afford, is necessarily limited by the number of great 
and small cattle that are kept in it. The state of its improvement, 
and the nature of its agriculture, again necessarily determine this 
number. 

The same causes, which, in the progress of improvement, grad- 
ually raise the price of butcher’s-meat, should have the same effect, 
it may be thought, upon the prices of wool and raw hides, and raise 
them too nearly in the same proportion. It probably would be so, 
if in the rude beginnings of improvement the market for the latter 
commodities was confined within as narrow bounds as that for the 
former. But the extent of their respective markets is commonly ex- 
tremely different. 

The market for butcher’s-meat is almost every-where confined to 
the country which produces it. Ireland, and some part of British 
America indeed, carry on a considerable trade in salt provisions; 
but they are, I believe, the only countries in the commercial world 
which do so, or which export to other countries any considerable 
part of their butcher’s-meat. 

The market for wool and raw hides, on the contrary, is in the 
rude beginnings of improvement very seldom confined to the coun- 
try which produces them. They can easily be transported to distant 
countries, wool without any preparation, and raw hides with very 
little: and as they are the materials of many manufactures, the in- 
dustry of other countries may occasion a demand for them, though 
that of the country which produces them might not occasion any. 

In countries ill cultivated, and therefore but thinly inhabited, the 
price of the wool and the hide bears always a much greater propor- 
tion to that of the whole beast, than in countries where, improve- 
ment and population being further advanced, there is more demand 
for butcher’s-meat. Mr. Hume observes, that in the Saxon times, 
the fleece was estimated at two-fifths of the value of the whole 
sheep, and that this was much above the proportion of its present 
estimation.^®^ In some provinces of Spain, I have been assured, the 
sheep is frequently killed merely for the sake of the fleece and the 
tallow. The carcase is often left to rot upon the ground, or to be de- 
voured by beasts and birds of prey. If this sometimes happens even 
in Spain, it happens almost constantly in Chili, at Buenos Ayres,^®^ 
and in many other parts of Spanish America, where the horned cat- 
tle are almost constantly killed merely for the sake of the hide and 
the tallow. This too used to happen almost constantly in Hispan- 
iola, while it was infested by the Buccaneers, and before the settle- 


other 
sorts of 
produce. 


Wool and 

hides in 

early 

times 

have a 

larger 

market 

open to 

them than 

butcher’s- 

meat. 


In thinly 
inhabited 
countries 
the wool 
and hide 
are more 
valuable 
in propor- 
tion to the 
carcase. 


History, ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 226. 

Juan and Ulloa, Voyage historique, 2de ptie, liv. i., chap, v., vol. i., p. 552. 



lathe 
progress 
of im- 
prove- 
ment the 
wool and 
hide 
should 
rise, 
though 
not so 
much as 
the car- 
case. 


Butin 
England 
wool has 
fallen 
since 1339. 


230 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

merit, improvement, and populousness of the French plantations 
(which now extend round the coast of almost the whole western 
half of the island) had given some value to the cattle of the Span- 
iards, who still continue to possess, not only the eastern part of the 
coast, but the whole inland and mountainous part of the country. 

Though in the progress of improvement and population, the price 
of the whole beast necessarily rises, yet the price of the carcase is 
likely to be much more affected by this rise than that of the wool 
and the hide. The market for the carcase, being in the rude state of 
society confined always to the country which produces it, must nec- 
essarily be extended in proportion to the improvement and popu- 
lation of that country. But the market for the wool and the hides 
even of a barbarous country often extending to the whole commer- 
cial world, it can very seldom be enlarged in the same proportion. 
The state of the whole commercial world can seldom be much af- 
fected by the improvement of any particular country; and the mar- 
ket for such commodities may remain the same, or very nearly the 
same, after such improvements, as before. It should, however, in 
the natural course of things rather upon the whole be somewhat ex- 
tended in consequence of them. If the manufactures, especially, of* 
which those commodities are the materials, should ever come to 
flourish in the country, the market, though it might not be much 
enlarged, would at least be brought much nearer to the place of 
growth than before; and the price of those materials might at least 
be increased by what had usually been the expence of transporting 
them to distant countries. Though it might not rise therefore in the 
same proportion as that of butcher^s-meat, it ought naturally to 
rise somewhat, and it ought certainly not to fall. 

In England, however, notwithstanding the flourishing state of its 
woollen manufacture, the price of English wool has fallen very con- 
siderably since the time of Edward III. There are many authentic 
records which demonstrate that during the reign of that prince (to- 
wards the middle of the fourteenth century, or about 1339) what 
was reckoned the moderate and reasonable price of the tod or twen- 
ty-eight pounds of English wool was not less than ten shillings of 
the money of those times,^^^ containing, at the rate of twenty-pence 
the ounce, six ounces of silver Tower-weight, equal to about thirty 
shillings of our present money. In the present times, one-and-twen- 
ty shillings the tod may be reckoned a good price for very good 
English wool. The money-price of wool, therefore, in the time of 

^®See Smith’s Memoirs of Wool, vol. i. c. 5, 6, and 7; also, vol. ii. c. 176. 
Ed. I does not give the volumes and chapters. The work was Chronicon Rus- 
Ucum-Commerciale, or Memoirs of Wool, etc., by John Smith, and pub- 
lished 1747; see below, p. 616. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 231 

Edward III, was to its money-price in the present times as ten to 
seven. The superiority of its real price was still greater. At the rate 
of six shillings and eight-pence the quarter, ten shillings was in 
those ancient times the price of twelve bushels of wheat. At the rate 
of twenty-eight shillings the quarter, one-and-twenty shillings is in 
the present times the price of six bushels only. The proportion be- 
tween the real prices of ancient and modern times, therefore, is as 
twelve to six, or as two to one. In those ancient times a tod of wool 
would have purchased twice the quantity of subsistence which it 
will purchase at present; and consequently twice the quantity of 
labour, if the real recompence of labour had been the same in both 
periods. 

This degradation both in the real and nominal value of wool, 
could never have happened in consequence of the natural course of 
things. It has accordingly been the effect of violence and artifice: 
First, of the absolute prohibition of exporting wool from Eng- 
land; Secondly, of the permission of importing it from Spain 
duty free; Thirdly, of the prohibition of exporting it from Ireland 
to any other country but England. In consequence of these regula- 
tions, the market for English wool, instead of being somewhat ex- 
tended in consequence of the improvement of England, has been 
confined to the home market, where the wool of several other coun- 
tries is allowed to come into competition with it, and where that 
of Ireland is forced into competition with it. As the woollen manu- 
factures too of Ireland are fully as much discouraged as is consis- 
tent with justice and fair dealing, the Irish can work up but a small 
part of their own wool at home, and are, therefore, obliged to send 
a greater proportion of it to Great Britain, the only market they 
are allowed. 

I have not been able to find any such authentic records concern- 
ing the price of raw hides in ancient times. Wool was commonly 
paid as a subsidy to the king, and its valuation in that subsidy as- 
certains, at least in some degree, what was its ordinary price. But 
this seems not to have been the case with raw hides. Fleetwood, 
however, from an account in 1425, between the prior of Burcester 
Oxford and one of his canons, gives us their price, at least as it was 
stated, upon that particular occasion; viz. five ox hides at twelve 
shillings; five cow hides at seven shillings and three pence; thirty- 
six sheep skins of two years old at nine shillings; sixteen calves 


See below, p. 612, and Smih’sMemoirs of Wool, vol. i., pp. i 59 j 182. 
Eds. I and 2 read “importing it from all other countries.” 

^®®Eds. I and 2 read “wool of all other countries.” 


This has 
been 

caused by 
artificial 
regula- 
tions. 


The real 
price of 
hides at 
present is 
somewhat 
lower 
than in 
the fif- 
teenth 
century, 



but their 
average 
price dur- 
ing the 
present 
century is 
probably 
higher. 


232 the wealth of nations 

skins at two shillings In 1425, twelve shillings contained about 
the same quantity of silver as four-and-twenty shillings of our pres- 
ent money. An ox hide, therefore, was in this account valued at the 
same quantity of silver as 45.|-ths of our present money. Its nom- 
inal price was a good deal lower than at present. But at the rate of 
six shillings and eight-pence the quarter, twelve shillings would in 
those times have purchased fourteen bushels and four-fifths of a 
bushel of wheat, which, at three and six-pence the bushel, would in 
the present times cost 51^. 4d. An ox hide, therefore, would in 
those times have purchased as much corn as ten shillings and three- 
pence would purchase at present. Its real value was equal to ten 
shillings and three-pence of our present money. In those ancient 
times, when the cattle were half starved during the greater part of 
the winter, we cannot suppose that they were of a very large size. 
An ox hide which weighs four stone of sixteen pounds averdupois, 
is not in the present times reckoned a bad one; and in those ancient 
times would probably have been reckoned a very good one. But at 
half a crown the stone, which at this moment (February 1773) I 
understand to be the common price, such a hide would at present 
cost only ten shillings. Though its nominal price, therefore, is high- 
er in the present than it was in those ancient times, its real price, 
the real quantity of subsistence which it will purchase or command, 
is rather somewhat lower. The price of cow hides, as stated in the 
above account, is nearly in the common proportion to that of ox 
hides. That of sheep skins is a good deal above it. They had prob- 
ably been sold with the wool. That of calves skins, on the contrary, 
is greatly below it. In countries where the price of cattle is very 
low, the calves, which are not intended to be reared in order to keep 
up the stock, are generally killed very young; as was the case in 
Scotland twenty or thirty years ago. It saves the milk, which their 
price would not pay for. Their skins, therefore, are commonly good 
for little. 

The price of raw hides is a good deal lower at present than it was 
a few years ago; owing probably to the taking off the duty upon 
seal skins, and to the blowing, for a limited time, the importation 
of raw hides from Ireland and from the plantations duty free, which 
was done in 1769.^^® Take the whole of the present century at an 
average, their real price has probably been somewhat higher than 
it was in those ancient times. The nature of the commodity renders 

Chrordcon predosum, ed. of 1707, p. 100, quoting from Rennet’s Par 
Ant. Burcester is the modem Bicester. 

9 Geo. III., c. 39, for five years; continued by 14 Geo. Ill, c 86, and ji 
G eo. m , c. 29. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 233 

it not quite so proper for being transported to distant markets as 
wool. It suffers more by keeping. A salted hide is reckoned inferior 
to a fresh one, and sells for a lower price. This circumstance must 
necessarily have some tendency to sink the price of raw hides pro- 
duced in a country which does not manufacture them, but is obliged 
to export them; and comparatively to raise that of those pro- 
duced in a country which does manufacture them. It must have 
some tendency to sink their price in a barbarous, and to raise it 
in an improved and manufacturing country. It must have had some 
tendency therefore to sink it in ancient, and to raise it in modern 
times. Our tanners besides have not been quite so successful as our 
clothiers, in convincing the wisdom of the nation, that the safety of 
the commonwealth depends upon the prosperity of their particular 
manufacture. They have accordingly been much less favoured. The 
exportation of raw hides has, indeed, been prohibited, and declared 
a nuisance: but their importation from foreign countries has 
been subjected to a duty; and though this duty has been taken 
off from those of Ireland and the plantations (for the limited time 
of five years only), yet Ireland has not been confined to the market 
of Great Britain for the sale of its surplus hides, or of those which 
are not manufactured at home. The hides of common cattle have 
but within these few years been put among the enumerated com- 
modities which the plantations can send no-where but to the mother 
country; neither has the commerce of Ireland been in this case op- 
pressed hitherto, in order to support the manufactures of Great 
Britain. 

Whatever regulations tend to sink the price either of wool or of 
raw hides below what it naturally would be, must, in an improved 
and cultivated country, have some tendency to raise the price of 
butcher’s-meat. The price both of the great and small cattle, which 
are fed on improved and cultivated land, must be sufficient to pay 
the rent which the landlord, and the profit which the farmer has rea- 
son to expect from improved and cultivated land. If it is not, they 
will soon cease to feed them. Whatever part of this price, therefore, 
is not paid by the wool and the hide, must be paid by the carcase. 
The less there is paid for the one, the more must be paid for the 
other. In what manner this price is to be divided upon the different 
parts of the beast, is indifferent to the landlords and farmers, pro- 
vided it is all paid to them. In an improved and cultivated country, 

'‘’"By 5 Eliz, c 22; 8 Eliz., c 14; r8 Eliz., c. 9; 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 7, 
which last uses the words ‘common and public nuisance.” See Blackstone, 
Commentaries, vol iv, pp. 167-169. 

‘“""g Ann., c. ii. 


They are 
not so 
easily 
trans- 
ported as 
wool, 


and tan- 
ners have 
not been 
so much 
favoured 
by legis- 
lation as 
clothiers. 


Regula- 
tions 
which 
sink the 
price of 
wool or 
hides in 
an im- 
proved 
country 
raise the 
price of 
meat, 



but not in 
an unim- 
proved 
country. 


The 
Union 
sank the 
price of 
Scotch 
wool, 
while it 
raised the 
price of 
Scotch 
meat. 

The effi- 
cacy of 
industry 
in increas- 
ing wool 


234 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

therefore, their interest as landlords and farmers cannot be much 
affected by such regulations, though their interest as consumers 
may, by the rise in the price of provisions.^^^ It would be quite oth- 
erwise, however, in an unimproved and uncultivated country, where 
the greater part of the lands could be applied to no other purpose 
but the feeding of cattle, and where the wool and the hide made the 
principal part of the value of those cattle. Their interest as land- 
lords and farmers would in this case be very deeply affected by 
such regulations, and their interest as consumers very little. The fall 
in the price of the wool and the hide, would not in this case raise the 
price of the carcase; because the greater part of the lands of the 
country being applicable to no other purpose but the feeding of cat- 
tle, the same number would still continue to be fed. The same quan- 
tity of butcher’s-meat would still come to market. The demand for 
it would be no greater than before. Its price, therefore, would be the 
same as before. The whole price of cattle would fall, and along with 
it both the rent and the profit of all those lands of which cattle was 
the principal produce, that is, of the greater part of the lands of the 
country. The perpetual prohibition of the exportation of wool, 
which is commonly, but very falsely, ascribed to Edward III,^°- 
would, in the then circumstances of the country, have been the 
most destructive regulation which could well have been thought of. 
It would not only have reduced the actual value of the greater part 
of the lands of the kingdom, but by reducing the price of the most 
important species of snrall cattle, it would have retarded very much 
its subsequent improvement. 

The wool of Scotland fell very considerably in its price in conse- 
quence of the union with England, by which it was excluded from 
tibe great market of Europe, and confined to the narrow one of 
Great Britain. The value of the greater part of the lands in the 
southern counties of Scotland, which are chiefly a sheep country, 
would have been very deeply affected by this event, had not the rise 
in the price of butcher^s-meat fully compensated the fall in the price 
of wool. 

As the efficacy of human industry, in increasing the quantity 
either of wool or of raw hides, is limited, so far as it depends upon 
the produce of the country where it is exerted; so it is uncertain so 
far as it depends upon the produce of other countries. It so far de- 
pends, not so much upon the quantity which they produce, as upon 

^^This passage, from the beginning of the paragraph, is quoted at length 
below, p. 617. 

John Smith, Memoirs of Wool, vol. i., p. 25, explains that the words ‘Tt 
shall be felony to carry away any wool out of the realm until it be otherwise 
ordained” do not imply a perpetual prohibition. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 235 

that which they do not manufacture; and upon the restraints 
which they may or may not think proper to impose upon the ex- 
portation of this sort of rude produce. These circumstances, as 
they are altogether independent of domestic industry, so they nec- 
essarily render the efficacy of its efforts more or less uncertain. In 
multiplying this sort of rude produce, therefore, the efficacy of hu- 
man industry is not only limited, but uncertain. 

In multiplying another very important sort of rude produce, the 
quantity of fish that is brought to market, it is likewise both lim- 
ited and uncertain. It is limited by the local situation of the coun- 
try, by the proximity or distance of its different provinces from the 
sea, by the number of its lakes and rivers, and by what may be 
called the fertility or barrenness of those seas, lakes and rivers, as 
to this sort of rude produce. As population increases, as the annual 
produce of the land and labour of the country grows greater and 
greater, there come to be more buyers of fish, and those buyers too 
have a greater quantity and variety of other goods, or, what is the 
same thing, the price of a greater quantity and variety of other 
goods, to buy with. But it will generally be impossible to supply the 
great and extended market without employing a quantity of labour 
greater than in proportion to what had been requisite for supplying 
the narrow and confined one. A market which, from requiring only 
one thousand, comes to require annually ten thousand ton of fish, 
can seldom be supplied without employing more than ten times the 
quantity of labour which had before been sufficient to supply it. The 
fish must generally be sought for at a greater distance, larger vessels 
must be employed, and more expensive machinery of every kind 
made use of. The real price of this commodity, therefore, naturally 
rises in the progress of improvement. It has accordingly done so, I 
believe, more or less in every country. 

Though the success of a particular day’s fishing may be a very 
uncertain matter, yet, the local situation of the country being sup- 
posed, the general efficacy of industry in bringing a certain quan- 
tity of fish to market, taking the course of a year, or of several years 
together, it may perhaps be thought, is certain enough; and it, no 
doubt, is so. As it depends more, however, upon the local situation 
of the country, than upon the state of its wealth and industry; as 
upon this account it may in different countries be the same in very 
different periods of improvement, and very different in the same 
period; its connection with the state of improvement is uncertain, 
and it is of this sort of uncertainty that I am here speaking. 

In increasing the quantity of the different minerals and metals 
which are drawn from the bowels of the earth, that of the more 


and hides 
is both 
limited 
and un- 
certain. 


The same 
thing is 
true of 
fish, 
which 
naturally 
rise in 
the prog- 
ress of 
improve- 
ment. 


The con- 
nexion of 
success in 

fi«;hing r 

with the 
state of 
improve-s 
mentis 
uncertain. 


Inin- 

crea^g 



minerals 
the effi- 
cacy of 
industry 
is not 
limited 
but un- 
certain. 

The 

quantity 
of the 
precious 
metals in 
a country 
depends 
on its 
power of 
purchas- 
ing and 
the fertil- 
ity of the 
mines. 


So far as 
it depends 
on the 
former 
circum- 
stance 
the real 
price is 
likely to 
rise with 
improve- 
ment; 

so far as It 
depends 
on the 
latter cir- 
cumstance 
the real 
price will 
vary with 
the fer- 
tility of 
the mines, 

which has 
no con- • 
nexion 
with the 
state of 


236 the wealth of nations 

precious ones particularly, the efficacy of human industry seems not 
to be limited, but to be altogether uncertain. 

The quantity of the precious metals which is to be found in any 
country is not limited by any thing in its local situation, such as the 
fertility or barrenness of its own mines. Those metals frequently 
abound in countries which possess no mines. Their quantity in 
every particular country seems to depend upon two different cir- 
cumstances; first, upon its power of purchasing, upon the state of 
its industry, upon the annual produce of its land and labour, in con- 
sequence of which it can afford to employ a greater or a smaller 
quantity of labour and subsistence in bringing or purchasing such 
superfluities as gold and silver, either from its own mines or from 
those of other countries; and, secondly, upon the fertility or bar- 
renness of the mines which may happen at any particular time to 
supply the commercial world with those metals. The quantity of 
those metals in the countries most remote from the mines, must be 
more or less affected by this fertility or barrenness, on account of 
the easy and cheap transportation of those »metals, of their small 
bulk and great value. Their quantity in China and Indostan must 
have been more or less affected by the abundance of the mines of 
America. 

So far as their quantity in any particular country depends upon 
the former of those two circumstances (the power of purchasing), 
their real price, like that of all other luxuries and superfluities, is 
likely to rise with the wealth and improvement of the country, and 
to fall with its poverty and depression. Countries which have a great 
quantity of labour and subsistence to spare, can afford to purchase 
any particular quantity of those metals at the expence of a greater 
quantity of labour and subsistence, than countries which have less 
to spare. 

So far as their quantity in any particular country depends upon 
the latter of those two circumstances (the fertility or barrenness of 
the mines which happen to supply the commercial world) their real 
price, the real quantity of labour and subsistence which they will 
purchase or exchange for, will, no doubt, sink more or less in pro- 
portion to the fertility, and rise in proportion to the barrenness, of 
those mines. 

The fertility or barrenness of the mines, however, which may 
happen at any particular time to supply the commercial world, is a 
circumstance which, it is evident, may have no sort of connection 
with the state of industry in a particular country. It seems even to 
have no very necessary connection with that of the world in gen- 
eral. As arts and commerce, indeed, gradually spread themselves 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 237 

over a greater and a greater part of the earth, the search for new 
mines, being extended over a wider surface, may have somewhat a 
better chance for being successful, than when confined within nar- 
rower bounds. The discovery of new mines, however, as the old ones 
come to be gradually exhausted, is a matter of the greatest uncer- 
tainty, and such as no human skill or industry can ensure. All indi- 
cations, it is acknowledged, are doubtful, and the actual discovery 
and successful working of a new mine can alone ascertain the re- 
ality of its value, or even of its existence. In this search there seem 
to be no certain limits either to the possible success, or to the pos- 
sible disappointment of human industry. In the course of a century 
or two, it is possible that new mines may be discovered more fer- 
tile than any that have ever yet been known; and it is just equally 
possible that the most fertile mine then known may be more barren 
than any that was wrought before the discovery of the mines of 
America. Whether the one or the other of those two events may hap- 
pen to take place, is of very little importance to the real wealth and 
prosperity of the world, to the real value of the annual produce of 
the land and labour of mankind. Its nominal value, the quantity of 
gold and silver by which this annual produce could be expressed or 
represented, would, no doubt, be very different; but its real value, 
the real quantity of labour which it could purchase or command, 
would be precisely the same. A shilling might in the one case rep- 
resent no more labour than a penny does at present; and a penny in 
the other might represent as much as a shilling does now. But in the 
one case he who had a shilling in his pocket, would be no richer than 
he who has a penny at present ; and in the other he who had a penny 
would be just as rich as he who has a shilling now. The cheapness 
and abundance of gold and silver plate, would be the sole advantage 
which the world could derive from the one event, and the dearness 
and scarcity of those trifling superfluities the only inconveniency it 
could suffer from the other. 


Conclusion of the Digression concerning the Variations in the Value 
of Silver 

The greater part of the writers who have collected the money prices 
of things in ancient times, seem to have considered the low money 
price of corn, and of goods in general, or, in other words, the high 
value of gold and silver, as a proof, not only of the scarcity of those 
metals, but of the poverty and barbarism of the country at the time 
when it took place. This notion is connected with the system of po- 


industry. 


The high 
value of 
the pre- 
cious 
metals is 
no proof 
of poverty 



and bar- 
barism, 


23B THE WEALTH OF NAIIONS 

litical ceconomy which represents national wealth as consisting in 
the abundance, and national poverty in the scarcity, of gold and sil- 
ver; a system which I shall endeavour to explain and examine at 
great length in the fourth book of this enquiry. I shall only observe 
at present, that the high value of the precious metals can be no 
proof of the poverty or barbarism of any particular country at the 
time when it took place. It is a proof only of the barrenness of the 
mines which happened at that time to supply the commercial world. 
A poor country, as it cannot afford to buy more, so it can as little af- 
ford to pay dearer for gold and silver than a rich one; and the value 
of those metals, therefore, is not likely to be higher in the former 
than in the latter. In China, a country much richer than any part 
of Europe, the value of the precious metals is much higher than 
in any part of Europe. As the wealth of Europe, indeed, has in- 
creased greatly since the discovery of the mines of America, so the 
value of gold and silver has gradually diminished. This diminution 
of their value, however, has not been owing to the increase of the 
real wealth of Europe, of the annual produce of its land and labour, 
but to the accidental discovery of more abundant mines than any 
that were known before. The increase of the quantity of gold and 
silver in Europe, and the increase of its manufactures and agricul- 
ture, are two events which, though they have happened nearly 
about the same time, yet have arisen from very different causes, and 
have scarce any natural connection with one another. The one has 
arisen from a mere accident, in which neither prudence nor policy 
either had or could have any share: The other from the fall of the 
feudal system, and from the establishment of a government which 
afforded to industry the only encouragement which it requires, some 
tolerable security that it shall enjoy the fruits of its own labour. 
Poland, where the feudal system still continues to take place, is at 
this day as beggarly a country as it was before the discovery of 
America. The money price of corn, however, has risen; the real 
value of the precious metals has fallen in Poland, in the same man- 
ner as in other parts of Europe. Their quantity, therefore, must 
have increased there as in other places, and nearly in the same pro- 
portion to the annual produce of its land and labour. This increase 
of the quantity of those metals, however, has not, it seems, in 
creased that annual produce, has neither improved the manufac- 
tures and agriculture of the country, nor mended the circumstances 
of its inhabitants. Spain and Portugal, the countries which possess 
the mines, are after Poland, perhaps, the two most beggarly coun- 


^The same words occur above, p. 189. 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 239 

tries in Europe. The value of the precious metals, however, must be 
lower in Spain and Portugal than in any other part of Europe; as 
they come from those countries to all other parts of Europe, loaded, 
not only with a freight and an insurance, but with the expence of 
smuggling, their exportation being either prohibited, or subjected 
to a duty. In proportion to the annual produce of the land and la- 
bour, therefore, their quantity must be greater in those countries 
than in any other part of Europe: Those countries, however, are 
poorer than the greater part of Europe. Though the feudal system 
has been abolished in Spain and Portugal, it has not been succeeded 
by a much better. 

As the low value of gold and silver, therefore, is no proof of the 
wealth and flourishing state of the country where it takes place; so 
neither is their high value, or the low money price either of goods in 
general, or of corn in particular, any proof of its poverty and bar- 
barism. 

But though the low money price either of goods in general, or of 
corn in particular, be no proof of the poverty or barbarism of the 
times, the low money price of some particular sorts of goods, such 
as cattle, poultry, game of all kinds, in proportion to that of 
corn, is a most decisive one. It clearly demonstrates, first, their 
great abundance in proportion to that of corn, and consequently the 
great extent of the land which they occupied in proportion to what 
was occupied by corn; and, secondly, the low value of this land in 
proportion to that of corn land, and consequently the uncultivated 
and unimproved state of the far greater part of the lands of the 
country. It clearly demonstrates that the stock and population of 
the country did not bear the same proportion to the extent of its 
territory, which they commonly do in civilized countries, and that 
society was at that time, and in that country, but in its infancy. 
From the high or low money price either of goods in general, or of 
corn in particular, we can infer only that the mjpes which at that 
time happened to supply the commercial world with gold and silver, 
were fertile or barren, not that the country was rich or poor. But 
from the high or low money price of some sorts of goods in propor- 
tion to that of others, we can infer, with a degree of probability that 
approaches almost to certainty, that it was rich or poor, that the 
greater part of its lands were improved or unimproved, and that it 
was either in a more or less barbarous state, or in a more or less civ- 
ilized one. 

Any rise in the money price of goods which proceeded altogether 


but the 
low price* 
of cattle, 
poultry, 
game, &c., 
is a proof 
of pover- 
ty or bar- 
barism. 


^ Ed. I does not contain “&c.’ 



A rise of 
price due 
entirely to 
degrada- 
tion of 
silver 
would af- 
fect all 
goods 
equally, 
but corn 
has risen 
much less 
than other 
provi- 
sions, 


and has 

indeed 

been 

somewhat 
lower in 
1701-64 
than in 
1637- 
1700 


while its 
recent 
high price 
has been 
due only 
to bad 
seasons. 

The dis- 
tinction 
between a 
rise of 
prices and 


240 the wealth of nations 

from the degradation of the value of silver, would affect all sorts of 
goods equally, and raise their price universally a third, or a fourth, 
or a fifth part higher, according as silver happened to lose a third, 
or a fourth, or a fifth part of its former value.^^^ But the rise in the 
price of provisions, which has been the subject of so much reasoning 
and conversation, does not affect all sorts of provisions equally. 
Taking the course of the present century at an average, the price of 
corn, it is acknowledged, even by those who account for this rise by 
the degradation of the value of silver, has risen much less than that 
of some other sorts of provisions. The rise in the price of those other 
sorts of provisions, therefore, cannot be owing altogether to the deg- 
radation of the value of silver. Some other causes must be taken 
into the account, and those which have been above assigned, will, 
perhaps, without having recourse to the supposed degradation of 
the value of silver, sufficiently explain this rise in those particular 
sorts of provisions of which the price has actually risen in propor- 
tion to that of corn. 

As to the price of corn itself, it has, during the sixty-four first 
years of the present century, and before the late extraordinary 
course of bad seasons, been somewhat lower than it was during the 
sixty-four last years of the preceding century. This fact is attested, 
not only by the accounts of Windsor market,^®® but by the public 
fiars of all the different counties of Scotland, and by the accounts 
of several different markets in France, which have been collected 
with great diligence and fidelity by Mr. Messance,^^® and by Mr. 
Dupre de St. Maur.^®^ The evidence is more complete than could 
well have been expected in a matter which is naturally so very dif- 
ficult to be ascertained. 

As to the high price of corn during these last ten or twelve years, 
it can be sufficiently accounted for from the badness of the seasons, 
without supposing any degradation in the value of silver. 

The opinion, therefore, that silver is continually sinking in its 
value, seems not to be founded upon any good observations, either 
upon the prices of corn, or upon those of other provisions. 

The same quantity of silver, it may, perhaps, be said, will in the 
present times, even according to the account which has been here 
given, purchase a much smaller quantity of several sorts of pro- 
visions than it would have done during some part of the last cen- 

^The arithmetic is slightly at fault. It should be, ^‘happened to lose a 
fourth, a fifth, or a sixth part of its former value.’ ^ 

Below, pp. 257, 258. Above, p. 76, 

Recherckes sur la Popidation, pp. 293-304. 

^ Essai sur les monnoies ou rijiexions sur U rapport entre V argent et les 
denrees, 1746, esp. p. 181 of the “Variations dans les prix ” 



DIGRESSION ON SILVER 241 

tury ; and to ascertain whether this change be owing to a rise in the 
value of those goods, or to a fall in the value of silver, is only to es- 
tablish a vain and useless distinction, which can be of no sort of ser- 
vice to the man who has only a certain quantity of silver to go to 
market with, or a certain fixed revenue in money. I certainly do not 
pretend that the knowledge of this distinction will enable him to 
buy cheaper. It may not, however, upon that account be altogether 
useless. 

It may be of some use to the public by affording an easy proof of 
the prosperous condition of the country. If the rise in the price of 
some sorts of provisions be owing altogether to a fall in the value 
of silver, it is owing to a circumstance from which nothing can be 
inferred but the fertility of the American mines. The real wealth of 
the country, the annual produce of its land and labour, may, not- 
withstanding this circumstance, be either gradually declining, as in 
Portugal and Poland; or gradually advancing, as in most other 
parts of Europe. But if this rise in the price of some sorts of pro- 
visions be owing to a rise in the real value of the land which pro- 
duces them, to its increased fertility; or, in consequence of more ex- 
tended improvement and good cultivation, to its having been ren- 
dered fit for producing corn; it is owing to a circumstance which in- 
dicates in the clearest manner the prosperous and advancing state 
of the country. The land constitutes by far the greatest, the most 
important, and the most durable part of the wealth of every exten- 
sive country. It may surely be of some use, or, at least, it may give 
some satisfaction to the Public, to have so decisive a proof of the in- 
creasing value of by far the greatest, the most important, and the 
most durable part of its wealth. 

It may too be of some use to the Public in regulating the pecun- 
iary reward of some of its inferior servants. If this rise in the price 
of some sorts of provisions be owing to a fall in the value of silver, 
their pecuniary reward, provided it was not too large before, ought 
certainly to be augmented in proportion to the extent of this fall. If 
it is not augmented, their real recompence will evidently be so much 
diminished. But if this rise of price is owing to the increased value, 
in consequence of the improved fertility of the land which produces 
such provisions, it becomes a much nicer matter to judge either in 
what proportion any pecuniary reward ought to be augmented, or 
whether it ought to be augmented at all. The extension of improve- 
ment and cultivation, as it necessarily raises more or less, in pro- 
portion to the price of com, that of every sort of animal food, so it 
as necessarily lowers that of, I believe, every sort of vegetable food. 
It raises the price of animal food; because a great part of the land 


a fall in 
the value 
of silver 
is not 
useless: 


it affords 
an easy 
proof of 
the pros- 
perity of 
the coun- 
try, 


and may 
be of use 
in regu- 
lating the 
wages of 
the inferi- 
or ser- 
vants of 
the state. 



The poor 
are more 
distressed 
by the ar- 
tificial rise 
of some 
manufac- 
tures than 
by the 
natural 
rise of 
rude pro- 
duce other 
than corn. 


But the 
natural 
effect of 
improve- 
ment is to 


242 the wealth of nations 

which produces it, being rendered fit for producing corn, must af- 
ford to the landlord and farmer the rent and profit of corn land. It 
lowers the price of vegetable food; because, by increasing the fer- 
tility of the land, it increases its abundance. The improvements of 
agriculture too introduce many sorts of vegetable food, which, re- 
quiring less land and not more labour than corn, come much cheap- 
er to market. Such are potatoes and maize, or what is called Indian 
corn, the two most important improvements which the agriculture 
of Europe, perhaps, which Europe itself, has received from the great 
extension of its commerce and navigation. Many sorts of vegetable 
food, besides, which in the rude state of agriculture are confined to 
the kitchen-garden, and raised only by the spade, come in its im- 
proved state to be introduced into common fields, and to be raised 
by the plough: such as turnips, carrots, cabbages, &c. If in the prog- 
ress of improvement, therefore, the real price of one species of food 
necessarily rises, that of another as necessarily falls, and it becomes 
a matter of more nicety to judge how far the rise in the one may be 
compensated by the fall in the other. When the real price of butch- 
er’s-meat has once got to its height (which, with regard to every 
sort, except, perhaps, that of hogs flesh, it seems to have done 
through a great part of England more than a century ago) , any rise 
which can afterwards happen in that of any other sort of animal 
food, cannot much affect the circumstances of the inferior ranks of 
people. The circumstances of the poor through a great part of Eng- 
land cannot surely be so much distressed by any rise in the price of 
poultry, fish, wild-fowl, or venison, as they must be relieved by the 
fall in that of potatoes. 

In the present season of scarcity the high price of corn no doubt 
distresses the poor. But in times of moderate plenty, when corn is 
at its ordinary or average price, the natural rise in the price of any 
other sort of rude produce cannot much affect them. They suffer 
more, perhaps, by the artificial rise which has been occasioned by 
taxes in the price of some manufactured commodities; as of salt, 
soap, leather, candles, malt, beer, and ale, &c. 


Ejects of the Progress of Improvement upon the real Price of 
Manufactures 

It is the natural effect of improvement, however, to diminish 
gradually the real price of almost all manufactures. That of the 
manufacturing workmanship diminishes, perhaps, in all of them 
without exception. In consequence of better machinery, of greater 



RENT OF LAND PRICE OF MANUFACTURES ^43 

dexterity, and of a more proper division and distribution of work, 
all of which are the natural effects of improvement, a much smaller 
quantity of labour becomes requisite for executing any particular 
piece of work; and though, in consequence of the flourishing cir- 
cumstances of the society, the real price of labour should rise very 
considerably, yet the great diminution of the quantity will general- 
ly much more than compensate the greatest rise which can happen 
in the price.^^^ 

There are, indeed, a few manufactures, in which the necessary 
rise in the real price of the rude materials will more than compen- 
sate all the advantages which improvement can introduce into the 
execution of the work. In carpenters and joiners work, and in the 
coarser sort of cabinet work, the necessary rise in the real price of 
barren timber, in consequence of the improvement of land, will 
more than compensate all the advantages which can be derived 
from the best machinery, the greatest dexterity, and the most prop- 
er division and distribution of work. 

But in all cases in which the real price of the rude materials 
either does not rise at all, or does not rise very much, that of the 
manufactured commodity sinks very considerably. 

This diminution of price has, in the course of the present and 
preceding century, been most remarkable in those manufactures of 
which the materials are the coarser metals. A better movement of a 
watch, than about the middle of the last century could have been 
bought for twenty pounds, may now perhaps be had for twenty 
shillings. In the work of cutlers and locksmiths, in all the toys 
which are made of the coarser metals, and in all those goods which 
are commonly known by the name of Birmingham and Sheffield 
ware, there has been, during the same period, a very great reduction 
of price, though not altogether so great as in watch-work. It has, 
however, been sufficient to astonish the workmen of every other 
part of Europe, who in many cases acknowledge that they can pro- 
duce no work of equal goodness for double, or even for triple the 
price. There are perhaps no manufactures in which the division of 
labour can be carried further, or in which the machinery employed 
admits of a greater variety of improvements, than those of which 
the materials are the coarser metals. 

In the clothing manufacture there has, during the same period, 
been no such sensible reduction of price. The price of superfine 
cloth, I have been assured, on the contrary, has, within these five- 
and-twenty or thirty years, risen somewhat in proportion to its 
quality; owing, it was said, to a considerable rise in the price of the 

^Ubove, p. 86. ^Lectures, pp. iS9, 164* 


dimmish 
the price 
of manu- 
factures. 


In a few 
manufac- 
tures the 
rise in the 
price of 
raw ma- 
terial 
counter- 
balances 
improve- 
ment in 
execution, 

but in 
other 
casesprice 
falls con- 
siderably. 

Since 
1600 this 
has been 
most re- 
markable 
in manu- 
factures 
made of 
the 

coarser 

metals. 


Clothing 
has not 
fallen 
much in 
the same 
period, 



244 


but very 
consider- 
ably since 
the fif- 
teenth 
century. 


Fine cloth 
has fallen 
to less 
than one- 
third of 
its price 
in 1487, 


and coarse 
cloth has 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

material, which consists altogether of Spanish wool. That of the 
Yorkshire cloth, which is made altogether of English wool, is said 
indeed, during the course of the present century, to have fallen a 
good deal in proportion to its quality. Quality, however, is so very 
disputable a matter, that I look upon all information of this kind as 
somewhat uncertain. In the clothing manufacture, the division of 
labour is nearly the same now as it was a century ago, and the 
machinery employed is not very different. There may, however, 
have been some small improvements in both, which may have oc- 
casioned some reduction of price. 

But^^^ the reduction will appear much more sensible and un- 
deniable, if we compare the price of this manufacture in the present 
times with what it was in a much remoter period, towards the end 
of the fifteenth century, when the labour was probably much less 
subdivided, and the machinery employed much more imperfect, 
than it is at present. 

In 1487, being the 4th of Henry VII.^^^ it was enacted, that 
“whosoever shall sell by retail a broad yard of the finest scarlet 
grained, or of other grained cloth of the finest making, above six- 
teen shillings, shall forfeit forty shillings for every yard so sold.” 
Sixteen shillings, therefore, containing about the same quantity of 
silver as four-and-twenty shillings of our present money, was, at 
that time, reckoned not an unreasonable price for a yard of the fin- 
est cloth; and as this is a sumptuary law, such cloth, it is probable, 
had usually been sold somewhat dearer. A guinea may be reckoned 
the highest price in the present times. Even though the quality of 
the cloths, therefore, should be supposed equal, and that of the 
present times is most probably much superior, yet, even upon this 
supposition, the money price of the finest cloth appears to have 
been considerably reduced since the end of the fifteenth century. 
But its real price has been much more reduced. Six shillings and 
eight-pence was then, and long afterwards, reckoned the average 
price of a quarter of wheat. Sixteen shillings, therefore, was the 
price of two quarters and more than three bushels of wheat. Valuing 
a quarter of wheat in the present times at eight-and-twenty shill- 
ings, the real price of a yard of fine cloth must, in those times, have 
been equal to at least three pounds six shillings and sixpence of our 
present money. The man who bought it must have parted with the 
command of a quantity of labour and subsistence equal to what that 
sum would purchase in the present times. 

The reduction in the real price of the coarse manufacture, though 
considerable, has not been so great as in that of the fine. 

^ Ed. I does not contain “but.” 


^*C. 8. 



RENT OF LAND PRICE OF MANUFACTURES ^45 

In 1463? being the 3d of Edward it was enacted, that 
servant in husbandry, nor common labourer, nor servant to any ar- 
tificer inhabiting out of a city or burgh, shall use or wear in their 
clothing any cloth above two shillings the broad yard.” In the 3d of 
Edward IV . two shillings contained very nearly the same* quantity 
of silver as four of our present money. But the Yorkshire cloth 
which is now sold at four shillings the yard, is probably much su- 
perior to any that was then made for the wearing of the very poorest 
order of common servants. Even the money price of their clothing, 
therefore, may, in proportion to the quality, be somewhat cheaper 
in the present than it was in those ancient times. The real price is 
certainly a good deal cheaper. Ten-pence was then reckoned what is 
called the moderate and reasonable price of a bushel of wheat. Two 
shillings, therefore, was the price of two bushels and near two pecks 
of wheat, which in the present times, at three shillings and sixpence 
the bushel, would be worth eight shillings and nine-pence. For a 
yard of this cloth the poor servant must have parted with the power 
of purchasing a quantity of subsistence equal to what eight shillings 
and nine-pence would purchase in the present times. This is a 
sumptuary law too, restraining the luxury and extravagance of the 
poor. Their clothing, therefore, had commonly been much more 
expensive. 

The same order of people are, by the same law, prohibited from 
wearing hose, of which the price should exceed fourteen-pence the 
pair, equal to about eight-and-twenty pence of our present money. 
But fourteen-pence was in those times the price of a bushel and near 
two pecks of wheat; which, in the present times, at three and six- 
pence the bushel, would cost five shillings and three-pence. We 
should in the present times consider this as a very high price for a 
pair of stockings to a servant of the poorest and lowest order. He 
must, however, in those times have paid what was really equivalent 
to this price for them. 

In the time of Edward IV. the art of knitting stockings was prob- 
ably not known in any part of Europe. Their hose were made of 
common cloth, which may have been one of the causes of their dear- 
ness. The first person that wore stockings in England is said to have 
been Queen Elizabeth, She received them as a present from the 
Spanish ambassador 

C 5. The quotations from this Act and from 4 Hen. VIL, c. 8, are not 
quite verbatim. 

'^“Dr. Howell in his History of the World, vol. ii., p. 222, relates ‘that 
Queen Elizabeth, in this third year of her reign, was presented with a pair of 
black knit silk stockings by her silk woman, Mrs. Mountague, and thenceforth 
she never wore doth ones any more.^ This eminent author adds ‘that King 


fallen to 
less than 
one half 
of its 
price in 
1463. 


Hose have 
fallen 
very con- 
siderably 
since 1463, 


when they 
were 
made of 
common 
cloth. 



The ma- 
chinery 
for mak- 
ing cloth 
has been 
much im- 
proved. 


which ex- 
plains the 
fall of 
price. 


The 
coarse 
manufac- 
ture was 
a house- 
hold one, 


246 the wealth of nations 

Both in the coarse and in the fine woollen manufacture, the ma- 
chinery employed was much more imperfect in those ancient, than it 
is in the present times. It has since received three very capital im- 
provements, besides, probably, many smaller ones of which it may 
be difficult to ascertain either the number or the importance. The 
three capital improvements are: first, the exchange of the rock and 
spindle for the spinning-wheel, which, with the same quantity of la- 
bour, will perform more than double the quantity of work. Second- 
ly, the use of several very ingenious machines which facilitate and 
abridge in a still greater proportion the winding of the worsted and 
woollen yarn, or the proper arrangement of the warp and woof be- 
fore they are put into the loom; an operation which, previous to the 
inventions of those machines, must have been extremely tedious and 
troublesome. Thirdly, The employment of the fulling mill for thick- 
ening the cloth, instead of treading it in water. Neither wind nor 
water mills of any kind were known in England so early as the be- 
ginning of the sixteenth century, nor, so far as I know, in any other 
part of Europe north of the Alps. They had been introduced into 
Italy some time before. 

The consideration of these circumstances may, perhaps, in some 
measure explain to us why the real price both of the coarse and of 
the fine manufacture, was so much higher in those ancient, than it 
is in the present times. It cost a greater quantity of labour to bring 
the goods to market. When they were brought thither, therefore, 
they must have purchased or exchanged for the price of a greater 
quantity. 

The coarse manufacture probably was, in those ancient times, 
carried on in England, in the same manner as it always has been in 
countries where arts and manufactures are in their infancy. It was 
probably a houshold manufacture, in which every different part of 
the work was occasionally performed by all the different members 
of almost every private family; but so as to be their work only when 
they had nothing else to do, and not to be the principal business 
from which any of them derived the greater part of their subsist- 

Henry VIII., that magnificent and expensive Prince, wore ordinarily cloth 
hose, except there came from Spain, by great chance, a pair of silk stockings; 
for Spain very early abounded in silk. His son, King Edward VI., was pre- 
sented with a pair of long Spanish silk stockings by his merchant. Sir Thomas 
Gresham, and the present was then much taken notice of.’ Thus it is plain 
that the invention of knit silk stockings originally came from Spain. Others 
relate that one William Rider, an apprentice on London Bridge, seeing at the 
house of an Italian merchant a pair of knit worsted stockings from Mantua, 
made with great skill a pair exactly like them, which he presented in the year 
1564 to William Earl of Pembroke, and were the first of that kind worn in 
England.”— Adam Anderson, Historical and Chronological Deduction of the 
Origin of Commerce, 1764, a.d. 1561. 



RENT OF land: CONCLUSION -47 

ence. The work which is performed in this manner, it has already 
been observed, comes always much cheaper to market than that 
which is the principal or sole fund of the workman’s subsistence. 
The fine manufacture, on the other hand, was not in those times 
carried on in England, but in the rich and commercial country of 
Flanders ; and it was probably conducted then, in the same manner 
as now, by people who derived the whole, or the principal part of 
their subsistence from it. It was besides a foreign manufacture, and 
must have paid some duty, the ancient custom of tonnage and 
poundage at least, to the king. This duty, indeed, would not prob- 
ably be very great. It was not then the policy of Europe to restrain, 
by high duties, the importation of foreign manufactures, but rather 
to encourage it, in order that merchants might be enabled to supply, 
at as easy a rate as possible, the great men with the conveniencies 
and luxuries which they wanted, and which the industry of their 
own country could not afford them. 

The consideration of these circumstances may perhaps in some 
measure explain to us why, in those ancient times, the real price of 
the coarse manufacture was, in proportion to that of the fine, so 
much lower than in the present times. 


Conclusion of the Chapter 

I SHALL conclude this very long chapter with observing that 
every improvement in the circumstances of the society tends either 
directly or indirectly to raise the real rent of land, to increase the 
real wealth of the landlord, his power of purchasing the labour, or 
the produce of the labour of other people. 

The extension of improvement and cultivation tends to raise it 
directly. The landlord’s share of the produce necessarily increases 
with the increase of the produce. 

That rise in the real price of those parts of the rude produce of 
land, which is first the effect of extended improvement and cultiva- 
tion, and afterwards the cause of their being still further extended, 
the rise in the price of cattle, for example, tends too to raise the rent 
of land directly, and in a still greater proportion. The real value of 
the landlord’s share, his real command of the labour of other people, 
not only rises with the real value of the produce, but the proportion 
of his share to the whole produce rises with it. That produce, after 
the rise in its real price, requires no more labour to collect it than 

Above, pp. ii6, 1 1 7. 

Towards the end of chapter x. the same words occur, omitting “very.” 


but the 
fine was 
carried on 
in Flan- 
ders by 
people 
who sub- 
sisted on 
it, and 
was sub- 
ject to 
customs 
duty, 


which ex- 
plains 
why the 
coarse 
was in 
those 

times low- 
er in pro- 
portion 
to the 
fine. 


Every im- 
prove- 
ment in 
the cir- 
cum- 
stances of 
society 
raises 
rent. 

Extension 
of im- 
prove- 
ment and 
cultiva- 
tion raises 
it directly, 

and so 
does the 



rise in 
the price 
of cattle, 
&c 

Improve- 
ments 
which re- 
duce the 
price of 
manufac- 
tures raise 
it indi- 
rectly, 


and so 
does every 
increase 
in the 
quantity 
of useful 
labour 
employed. 


The con- 
trary cir- 
cum- 
stances 
lower 
rent. 


There 
are three 
parts of 
produce 
and three 
original 
orders of 
society. 


The inter- 
est of the 
proprie- 
tors of 


248 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

before. A smaller proportion of it will, therefore, be sufficient to re- 
place, with the ordinary profit, the stock which employs that la- 
bour. A greater proportion of it must, consequently, belong to the 
landlord.^^® 

All those improvements in the productive powers of labour, 
which tend directly to reduce the real price of manufactures, tend 
indirectly to raise the real rent of land. The landlord exchanges that 
part of his rude produce, which is over and above his own consump- 
tion, or what comes to the same thing, the price of that part of it, 
for manufactured produce. Whatever reduces the real price of the 
latter, raises that of the former. An equal quantity of the former be- 
comes thereby equivalent to a greater quantity of the latter; and 
the landlord is enabled to purchase a greater quantity of the con- 
veniencies, ornaments, or luxuries, which he has occasion for. 

Every increase in the real wealth of the society, every increase in 
the quantity of useful labour employed within it, tends indirectly to 
raise the real rent of land. A certain proportion of this labour nat- 
urally goes to the land. A greater number of men and cattle are em- 
ployed in its cultivation, the produce increases with the increase of 
the stock which is thus employed in raising it, and the rent increases 
with the produce. 

The contrary circumstances, the neglect of cultivation and im- 
provement, the fall in the real price of any part of the rude produce 
of land, the rise in the real price of manufactures from the decay of 
manufacturing art and industry, the declension of the real wealth 
of the society, all tend, on the other hand, to lower the real rent of 
land, to reduce the real wealth of the landlord, to diminish his 
power of purchasing either the labour, or the produce of the labour 
of other people. 

The whole annual produce of the land and labour of every coun- 
try, or what comes to the same thing, the whole price of that an- 
nual produce, naturally divides itself, it has already been ob- 
served, into three parts; the rent of land, the wages of labour, 
and the profits of stock; and constitutes a revenue to three different 
orders of people; to those who live by rent, to those who live by 
wages, and to those who live by profit. These are the three great, 
original and constituent orders of every civilized society, from 
whose revenue that of every other order is ultimately derived. 

The interest of the first of those three great orders, it appears 
from what has been just now said, is strictly and inseparably con- 
nected with the general interest of the society. Whatever either pro- 

^ The opposite of this is stated on p 318 below ^ Above, p 52 



RENT OF land: CONCLUSION 249 

motes or obstructs the one, necessarily promotes or obstructs the 
other. When the public deliberates concerning any regulation of 
commerce or police, the proprietors of land never can mislead it, 
with a view to promote the interest of their own particular order; at 
.least, if they have any tolerable knowledge of that interest. They 
are, indeed, too often defective in this tolerable knowledge. They 
are the only one of the three orders whose revenue costs them neith- 
er labour nor care, but comes to them, as it were, of its own accord, 
and independent of any plan or project of their own. That indo- 
lence, which is the natural effect of the ease and security of their sit- 
uation, renders them too often, not only ignorant, but incapable of 
that application of mind which is necessary in order to foresee and 
understand the consequences of any public regulation. 

The interest of the second order, that of those who live by wages, 
is as strictly connected with the interest of the society as that of the 
first. The wages of the labourer, it has already been shewn,^^® are 
never so high as when the demand for labour is continually rising, 
or when the quantity employed is every year increasing consider- 
ably. When this real wealth of the society becomes stationary, his 
wages are soon reduced to what is barely enough to enable him to 
bring up a family, or to continue the race of labourers. When the 
society declines, they fall even below this. The order of proprietors 
may, perhaps, gain more by the prosperity of the society, than that 
of labourers: but there is no order that suffers so cruelly from its 
decline. But though the interest of the labourer is strictly connected 
with that of the society, he is incapable either of comprehending 
that interest, or of understanding its connexion with his own. His 
condition leaves him no time to receive the necessary information, 
and his education and habits are commonly such as to render him 
unfit to judge even though he was fuHy informed. In the public de- 
liberations, therefore, his voice is little heard and less regarded, ex- 
cept upon some particular occasions, when his clamour is animated, 
set on, and supported by his employers, not for his, but their own 
particular purposes. 

His employers constitute the third order, that of those who live 
by profit. It is the stock that is employed for the sake of profit, 
which puts into motion the greater part of the useful labour of 
every society. The plans and projects of the employers of stock reg- 
ulate and direct all the most important operations of labour, and 
profit is the end proposed by all those plans and projects. But the 
rate of profit does not, like rent and wages, rise with the prosperity, 
and fall with the declension, of the society. On the contrary, it is 

^Above, pp 69-71 


land is in- 
separably 
connected 
with the 
general 
interest 
of the 
society. 


So also is 
that of 
those who 
live by 
wages. 


but the 
interest of 
those who 
live by 
profit has 
not the 
same con- 
nexion 
with the 
general 
interest of 



the so- 
ciety. 


250 the wealth of nations 

naturally low in rich, and high in poor countries, and it is always 
highest in the countries which are going fastest to ruin. The interest 
of this third order, therefore, has not the same connexion with the 
general interest of the society as that of the other two. Merchants 
and master manufacturers are, in this order, Ae two classes of people, 
who commonly employ the largest capitals, and who by their wealth 
draw to themselves the greatest share of the public consideration. 
As during their whole lives they are engaged in plans and projects, 
they have frequently more acuteness of understanding than the 
greater part of country gentlemen. As their thoughts, however, are 
commonly exercised rather about the interest of their own particu- 
lar branch of business, than about that of the society, their judg- 
ment, even when given with the greatest candour (which it has not 
been upon every occasion) , is much more to be depended upon with 
regard to the former of those two objects, than with regard to the lat- 
ter. Their superiority over the country gentleman is, not so much in 
their knowledge of the public interest, as in their having a better 
knowledge of their own interest than he has of his. It is by this su- 
perior knowledge of their own interest that they have frequently 
imposed upon his generosity, and persuaded him to give up both his 
own interest and that of the public, from a very simple but honest 
conviction, that their interest, and not his, was the interest of the 
public. The interest of the dealers, however, in any particular 
branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects differ- 
ent from, and even opposite to, that of the public. To widen the 
market and to narrow the competition, is always the interest of the 
dealers. To widen the market may frequently be agreeable enough 
to the interest of the public; but to narrow the competition must al- 
ways be against it, and can serve only to enable the dealers, by rais- 
ing their profits above what they naturally would be, to levy, for 
their own benefit, an absurd tax upon the rest of their fellow-citi- 
zens. The proposal of any new law or regulation of commerce which 
comes from this order, ought always to be listened to with great pre- 
caution, and ought never to be adopted till after having been long 
and carefully examined, not only with the most scrupulous, but 
with the most suspicious attention. It comes from an order of men, 
whose interest is never exactly the same with that of the public, who 
have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the pub- 
lic, and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived 
and oppressed it. 



JRENT OF land: CONCLUSION 


251 


The average Price of 

Years Price of the Quarter Average of the dif- each Year in Money 
XIL of Wheat each ferent Prices of the of the present 
Year.^ 2 ^ same Year. Times.^^^ 


1202 

1205 

1223 

1237 

1243 

1244 

1246 

1247 

1257 

1258 


1270 

1286 


Total, 35 9 3 

Average Price, 2 19 i| 

^ As is explained above, p. 185, the prices from 1202 to 1597 are collected 
from Fleetwood {Chronicon Pnciosum, 1707, pp. 77-124), and from 1598 to 
1601 they are from the Eton College account without any reduction for the 
size of the Windsor quarter or the quality of the wheat, and consequently 
■'identical with those given in the table on p. 256 below, as to which see note. 

^ In the reduction of the ancient money to the eighteenth century standard 
the table in Martin Folkes {Table of English Silver Coins, 1745, p. 142) ap- 
pears to have been followed. Approximate figures are aimed at {e.g., the factor 
3 does duty both for 2*906 and 2*871), and the error is not always uniform, 
e,g,, between 1464 and 1497 some of the sums appear to have been multiplied 
by the approximate i^and others by the exact 1*55. 




252 


THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 


Years 

XII. 


Price of the Quarter 
of Wheat each 
Year, 


Average of the dif- 
ferent Prices of the 
same Year. 


The Average Price of 
each Year in Money 
of the present 
Times. 


1287 


1288 


1289 


£. d. 

3 4 . 

8 


I 

I 

I 

1 

2 

3 
9 

12 

6 

2 

10 


£. 5. d. 


0 1223 

3 4 . 


— 10 if 


£. d, 
— 10 — 


- 9 — f 


I 10 41^24 


1290 

1294 

1302 

1309 

1315 

1316 


1317 


1336 

1338 


— 16 

— 16 — 

— 4 — 

— 7 2 

I — 

I — 

I 10 

1 12 

2 — 
24 — 

— 14 — 
2 13 — 
4 — — 

I- 6 _8 

— 3 4 



I 10 6 


I 19 6 


2 8 — 

28 — 

— 12 — 

I I 6 

3 — — 

4 II 6 


5 18 6 

— 6 — 
— 10 — 


Total, 23 4 1I4 

Average Price, i 18 8 


^ This should be 2s. 7f d. The mistake is evidently due to the 3s. 4d. be- 
longing to the year 1287 having been erroneously added in. 

Sic in all editions. More convenient to the unpractised eye in adding up 
than “i” 

“And sometime xxs. as H. Knighton.” — ^Fleetwood, Chronicon Preciosum, 
p, 82. 

^■®Miscopied: it is £2 13s. 4d. in Fleetwood, op. cit.j p. 92. 



RENT OF land: CONCLUSION 


253 


Years 

XIL 

1 

Price of the Quarter 
of Wheat each 
Year, 

i 

Average of the dif- 
ferent Prices of the 
same Year. | 

The average Price of 
each Year in Money 
of the present 
Times. 

1339 


d, 

9 — 

1 

1 

1 

£. d, 

I 7 — 

1349 


— 2 — 

— — — 

— S 2 

1359 


168 

— — — 

322 

1361 


— 2 — 

— — — 

- 4 8 

1363 



— — — 

I 15 — 

1369 


r I 1 

1 I 4 —/ 

12 — 

2 9 4^27 

1379 


— 4 — 

— — — 

— 9 4 

13S7 


— 2 — 

— — — 

— 48 

1390 


f— 13 4] 

— 14 5 

I 13 7 

1401 


[- 16 -1 
— 16 — 


I 17 4 

1407 

1 

f— 4 4i\ 

1—34/ 

— 3 10 

- 8 II 

1416 


— 16 — 

— 

I 12 — 


Total, IS 9 4 

Average Price, i $ 9I 



£. 

j. d . 

£. 

s . 

d . 

£. 

S . 

d . 

1^23 

— 

8 — 

— 

— 

— 

— 

16 

— 

1425 

— 

4 — 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 

1434 

I 

6 8 

— 

— 

— 

2 

13 

4 

1435 

— 

s 4 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10 

8 

1439 

{: 

6 8/ 

I 

3 

4 

2 

6 

8 

1440 

I 

4 

— 

— 

— 

2 

8 

— 

1444 

{= 


— 

4 

2 

— 

8 

4 

I 44 S 


4 6 

— 

— 

% 

— 

9 

— 

1447 

— 

8 — 

— 

— 

— 

— 

16 

— 

1448 

— 

6 8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

13 

4 

1449 

— 

5 — 

— 

— 

— 

— 

10 


1451 

— 

8 — 

— 

— 

— 1 

— 

16 



Total, 12 IS 4 

Average Price, i i si 


Obviously a mistake for £2 iis. 4d. 



254 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Years 

XIL 

Price of the Quarter 
of Wheat each 
Year. 

Average of the dif- 
ferent Prices of the 
same Year. 

The average Price of 
each Year in Money 
of the present 
Times, 

1453 

£. 5. d. 

— 5 4 

1 ^ 

1 

1 

£. .r. d. 

— 10 8 

1455 

— 12 

— — — 

— 2 4 

1457 

- 7 8 

— — — 

15 4 

1459 

— 5 — 

— — — 

— 10 — 

1460 

~ 8 ~ 

— — — . 

— 16 — 

1463 

{- I s) 

— I 10 

- 3 8 

1464 

— 6 8 

^ 

— 10 — 

i486 

I 4 — 

— — — 

I 17 — 

1491 

— 14 8 

— — — 

12 — 

1494 

— 4 — 

— — — 

— 6 — 

T495 

— 3 4 

— — — 

— 5 — 

1497 

I — — - 

— — — 

I II — 


Total, 89 — 
Average Price, — 14 i 



£. 


d. 

£. 

s. 

d. 

£. 

s. 

d. 

1499 

— 

4 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

6 

— 

1504 



5 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

6 

1521 

I 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

I 

10 

— 

1551 

— 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

2 

— 

1SS3 

— 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 

ISS4 

— 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 

1555 

— 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 

1556 

f ~ 

8 

A 


— 

— 

— 

— 

8 


ISS7 

= 

T- 

5 

8 

:) 

— 

17 

gl228 

— 

17 



i 2 

13 

4] 







1558 


8 


— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 

IS59 

— 

8 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 

1560 

— 

8 


— 

— 

— 

— 

8 

— 


Total, 6 0 2I 


Average Price, — 10 

®^This should be 17s. 7d. here and in the next column. Eds. i and 2 read 
“i2s. 7d.,” a mistake of £i having been made in the addition. 

"“This should obviously be los./^ d. Eds. i and 2 read “£6 5s. id.^^ for the 
total and “los. 5d.” for the average, in consequence of the mistake mentioned 
in the preceding note. 



RENT OF land: CONCLUSION 


255 


Years 

XII. 

Price of the Quarter 
of Wheat each 
Year, 

Average of the dif- 
ferent Prices of the 
same Year. 

The average Price of 
each Year in Money 
of the present 
Times. 

1561 

1 

^00 

cti 1 

1 


£. s. d. 

£. s. d. 

— 8 — 

1562 

— 8 — 


— — — 

— 8 — 

1574 

/ 2 16 — 1 

1 I 4 — J 

1 

2 — — 

2 — — 

1587 

34 — 


— — — 

3 4 — 

IS 94 

2 16 — 


— — — 

2 16 — 

IS 9 S 

2 13 —230 

— — — 

2 13 — 

1596 



— — — 

4 — — 

IS 97 

/ s 4 — 1 
1 4 J 


1 

M 

4 12 — 

1S98 

2 16 8 


— — — 

2 16 8 

IS 99 

I 19 2 




I 19 2 

1600 

I 17 8 




I 17 8 

1601 

I 14 1 

— — 

I 14 10 


Total, 28 9 4 

Average Price, 2 7 


^^Miscopied: it is £2 13s, 4d. in Fleetwood, Chronicon Preciosum, p. 123. 
^See p. 251,* note 221. 

Eds. I and 2 read £2 4s. 9 Jd-j the 89s. left over after dividing the pounds 
having been inadvertently divided by 20 instead of by 12, 






2S6 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Prices of the Quarter of nine Bushels of the best or highest priced Wheat at Windsor 
Market, on Lady-Day and Michaelmas, from I5p5 to 1764, both inclusive; 
the Price of each Year being the Medium between the highest Prices of those 
Two Market-days.^^^ 


Years 

IS95, 

150 , 

1597 , 

1598, 

1599, 

1600, 

1601, 

1602, 

1603, 

1604, 

1605, 

1606, 

1607, 

1608, 

1609, 

1610, 

1611, 

1612, 

1614, 

1615, 

1616, 

1617, 

1618, 

1619, 

1620, 



£. 

5 . 

d . 

Years 


£. 

5 . 

d . 

— 

2 

0 

0 

1621, 

— 

I 

10 

4 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1622, 

— 

2 

18 

8 

— 

3 

9 

6 

1623, 

— 

2 

12 

0 

— 

2 

16 

8 

1624, 

— 

2 

8 

0 

— 

I 

19 

2 

1625, 

— 

2 

12 

0 

— 

I 

17 

8 

1626, 

— 

2 

9 

4 

— 

I 

X 4 

10 

1627, 

— 

I 

16 

0 

— 

I 

9 

4 

1628, 

— 

I 

8 

0 

— 

1 

IS 

4 

1629, 

— 

2 

2 

0 

— 

I 

10 

8 

1630, 

— 

2 

IS 

8 

— 

I 

15 

10 

1631, 

— 

3 

8 

0 

— 

I 

13 

0 

1632, 

— 

2 

13 

4 

— 

I 

16 

8 

1633, 

— 

2 

18 

0 

— 

2 

16 

8 

1634, 

— 

2 

16 

0 

— 

2 

10 

0 

163s, 

— 

2 

16 

0 

— 

I 

IS 

10 

1636, 

— 

2 

16 

8 

— 

I 

18 

8 



— 


— 

— 

2 

2 

4 



16)40 

0 

0 

— 

2 

8 

8 



— 


— 

— 

2 

I 




2 

10 

0 

— 

I 

18 

8 






— 

2 

0 

4 






— 

2 

8 

8 






— 

2 

6 

8 






— 

I 

IS 

4 







I 

10 

4 







26)54 

0^ 








2 

I 








The list of prices, but not the division into periods, is apparently copied 
from Charles Smith (Tracts on the Corn Trade, 1766, pp. 97-102, cp. pp. 43, 
104), who, however, states that it had been previously published, p. 96. 



RENT OF land: CONCLUSION 


257 


Wheat per quarter. 


'ears 

£. 

s . 

d . 

1637, — 

2 

13 

0 

1638, — 

2 

17 

4 

1639. — 

2 

4 

10 

1640, — 

2 

4 

8 

1641, — 

2 

8 

0 

1642,'! f 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

i644.hg^||s| 

0 

0 

0 


0 

0 

0 

1646, — 

2 

8 

0 

1647, — 

3 

13 

8 

1648, — 

4 

S 

0 

1649, — 

4 

0 

0 

1650, — 

3 

16 

8 

1651, — 

3 

13 

4 

1652, — 

2 

9 

6 

i 6S3 j — 

I 

IS 

6 

1654, — 

I 

6 

0 

1655, — 

I 

13 

4 

1656, — 

2 

3 

0 

1657, — 

2 

6 

8 

1658, — 

3 

5 

0 

1659, — 

3 

6 

0 

1660, — 

2 

16 

6 

1661, — 

3 

10 

0 

1662, — 

3 

14 

0 

1663, — 

2 

17 

0 

1664, — 

2 

0 

6 

:66s, — 

2 

9 

4 

1666, — 

I 

16 

0 

1667, — 

I 

16 

0 

1668, — 

2 

0 

0 

1669, — 

2 

4 

4 

1670, — 

2 

I 

8 

Carry over, 

79 

14 

10 


Wheat per quarter. 


Years 


£. 

s . 


Brought over, 

79 

14 

10 

1671, 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1672, 

— 

2 

I 

0 

1673. 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1674, 

— 

3 

8 

8 

167s, 

— 

3 

4 

8 

1676, 

— 

I 

18 

0 

1677, 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1678, 

— 

2 

19 

0 

1679, 

— 

3 

0 

0 

1680, 

— 

2 

5 

0 

1681, 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1682, 

1683, 

— 

2 

4 

0 

— 

2 

0 

0 

1684, 

— 

2 

4 

0 

1685, 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1686, 

1687, 

— 

I 

14 

0 


I 

S 

2 

1688, 

— 

2 

6 

0 

1689, 

— 

I 

10 

0 

1690, 

— 

I 

14 

8 

1691, 

— 

I 

14 

0 

1692, 

— 

2 

6 

8 

1693, 

— 

3 

7 

8 

1694, 

— 

3 

4 

0 

169s, 

— 

2 

13 

0 

1696, 

— 

3 

II 

0 

1697, 

— 

3 

0 

0 

1698, 

— 

3 

8 

4 

1699, 

— 

3 

4 

0 

1700, 

— 

2 

0 

0 



60)153 

I 

8 



2 

II 

oi 



8 

Years 


THE WEALTE 

Wheat per quarter. 
£. s . d . 

[ OF NATIONS 

Wheat per quatrer. 
Years £. s . d . 

1701, 

— 

I 

17 

8 

Brought over, 69 

8 8 

1702, 

— 

I 

9 

6 

1734, 

— I 

18 10 

1703, 

— 

I 

16 

0 

I 73 S. 

— 2 

3 0 

1704, 

— 

2 

6 

6 

1736. 

— 2 

0 4 

170S, 

— 

I 

10 

0 

1737, 

1738, 

— I 

18 0 

1706, 

— 

I 

6 

0 

— I 

15 6 

1707, 

— 

I 

8 

6 

1739, 

— I 

18 6 

1708, 


2 

I 

6 

1740, 

— 2 

10 8 

1709, 

— 

3 

18 

6 

1741, 

— 2 

6 8 

1710, 

— 

3 

18 

0 

1742, 

— I 

14 0 

1711, 

— 

2 

14 

0 

1743, 

— I 

4 10 

1712, 

— 

2 

6 

4 

1744. 

— I 

4 10 

1713, 

— 

2 

II 

0 

I 74 S, 

— I 

7 6 

1714, 

— 

2 

10 

4 

1746, 

— I 

19 0 

1715, 

1716, 

— 

2 

3 

0 

1747 . 

— I 

14 10 

— 

2 

8 

0 

1748, 

— ' I 

17 0 

1717, 

— 

2 

5 

8 

1749, 

— I 

17 0 

1718, 

— - 

I 

18 

10 

1730, 

— I 

12 6 

1719, 

— 

I 

IS 

0 

1751, 

— I 

18 6 

1720, 

— 

I 

17 

0 

1752, 

— 2 

I 10 

1721, 

— 

I 

17 

6 

1753, 

— 2 

4 8 

1722, 

— 

I 

16 

0 

I 7 S 4 , 

— I 

14 8 

1723, 

— 

I 

14 

8 

1755 , 

1756, 

— I 

13 10 

1724, 

— 

I 

17 

0 

— 2 

5 3 

1725, 

— 

2 

8 

6 

1757, 

— 3 

0 0 

1726, 

— 

2 

6 

0 

1758, 

— 2 

10 0 

1727, 

— 

2 

2 

0 

1759, 

1760, 

— I 

19 10 

1728, 

— 

2 

14 

6 

— I 

16 6 

1729, 

— 

2 

6 

10 

1761, 

— I 

10 3 

1730, 

— 

I 

16 

6 

1762, 

— I 

19 0 

1731, 

— 

I 

12 

10 

1763, 

— * 2 

0 9 

1732 ; 

— 

I 

6 

8 

1764, 

— 2 

6 9 

1733, — 184 

Carryover, 69 8 8 

Wheat per quarter. 
Years £. d . 

Years 

64)129 13 6 

2 06 

Wheat per quarter. 
£. d . 

1731, 

— 

I 

12 

10 

1741, 

— 2 

6 8 

1732, 

— 

I 

6 

8 

1742, 

— I 

14 0 

1733. 

— 

r 

8 

4 

1743, 

— I 

4 10 

1734. 

— 

I 

18 

10 

1744, 

~~ I 

4 10 

i 73 S> 

— 

2 

3 

0 

1745, 

— I 

7 6 

1736. 

— 

2 

0 

4 

1746, 

— I 

19 0 

I 737 > 

1738, 

— 

I 

18 

0 

1747, 

— I 

14 10 

— 

I 

IS 

6 

1748, 

— I 

17 0 

I 739 > 

— 

I 

18 

6 

1749, 

— I 

17 0 

1740, 


2 

10 

8 

1750. 

— I 

12 6 



10)18 

I 

12 

17 

8 

35 


10) r6 

I 

18 2 

13 9 i 


®’*This should be A* 



BOOK II 


Of the Nature, Accumulation, and Employment of Stock 
INTRODUCTION 

In that rude state of society in which there is no division of labour, 
in which exchanges are seldom made, and in which every man pro- 
vides every thing for himself, it is not necessary that any stock 
should be accumulated or stored up beforehand, in order to carry 
on the business of the society. Every man endeavours to supply by 
his own industry his own occasional wants as they occur. TOien he 
is hungry, he goes to the forest to hunt; when his coat is worn out, 
he clothes himself with the skin of the first large animal he kills: 
and when his hut begins to go to ruin, he repairs it, as well as he can, 
with the trees and the turf that are nearest it. 

But when the division of labour has once been thoroughly intro- 
duced, the produce of a man’s own labour can supply but a very 
small part of his occasional wants. The far greater part of them are 
supplied by the produce of other mens labour, which he purchases 
with the produce, or what is the same thing, with the price of the 
produce of his own. But this purchase cannot be made till such time 
as the produce of his own labour has not only been completed, but 
sold. A stock of goods of different kinds, therefore, must be stored 
up somewhere sufficient to maintain him, and to supply him with 
the materials and tools of his work, till such time, at least, as both 
these events can be brought about. A weaver cannot apply himself 
entirely to his peculiar business, unless there is beforehand stored up 
somewhere, either in his own possession or in that of some other 
person, a stock sufficient to maintain him, and to supply him with 
the materials and tools of his work, till he has not only completed 
but sold his web. This accumulation must, evidently, be previous to 
his applying his industry for so long a time to such a peculiar 
business.^ 


In the 
rude state 
of society 
stock is 
unneces- 
sary. 


Division 
of labour 
makes it 
necessary. 


Lectures, p. i8i. 



Accumu- 
lation of 
stock and 
division 
of labour 
advance 
together. 


Accumu- 
lation 
causes the 
same 
quantity 
of indus- 
try to 
produce 
more. 


This Book 
treats of 
the nature 
of stock, 
the ef- 
fects of 
its accu- 
mulation, 
and its 
different 
employ- 
ments. 


260 the wealth oe nations 

As the accumulation of stoci must, in the nature of things, be 
previous to the division of labour, so labour can be more and more 
subdivided^ in proportion only as stock is previously more and 
more accumulated. The quantity of materials which the same num- 
ber of people can work up, increases in a great proportion as labour 
comes to be more and more subdivided; and as the operations of 
each workman are gradually reduced to a greater degree of sim- 
plicity, a variety of new machines come to be invented for facili- 
tating and abridging those operations. As the division of labour 
advances, therefore, in order to give constant employment to an 
equal number of workmen, an equal stock of provisions, and a 
greater stock of materials and tools than what would have been 
necessary in a ruder state of things, must be accumulated before- 
hand. But the number of workmen in every branch of business gen- 
erally increases with the division of labour in that branch, or rather 
it is the increase of their number which enables them to class and 
subdivide themselves in this manner. 

As the accumulation of stock is previously necessary for carry- 
ing on this great improvement in the productive powers of labour, 
so that accumulation naturally leads to this improvement. The per- 
son who employs his stock in maintaining labour, necessarily wishes 
to employ it in such a manner as to produce as great a quantity of 
work as possible. He endeavours, therefore, both to make amgng 
his workmen the most proper distribution of employment, and to 
furnish them with the best machines which he can either invent or 
afford to purchase. His abilities in both these respects are generally 
in proportion to the extent of his stock, or to the number of people 
whom it can employ. The quantity of industry, therefore, not only 
increases in every country with the increase of the stock which em- 
ploys it, but, in consequence of that increase, the same quantity of 
industry produces a much greater quantity of work. 

Such are in general the ef ects of the increase of stock upon in- 
dustry and its productive powers. 

In the following book I have endeavoured to explain the nature 
of stock, the effects of its accumulation into capitals of different 
kinds, and the effects of the different employments of those capitals. 
This book is divided into five chapters. In the first chapter, I have 
endeavoured to show what are the different parts or branches into 
which the stock, either of an individual, or of a great society, nat- 
urally divides itself. In the second, I have endeavoured to explain 
the nature and operation of money considered as a particular 
branch of the general stock of the society. The stock which is ac- 

^ Eds. I and 2 place the “only” here. 



INTRODUCTION 


261 


cumulated into a capital, may either be employed by the person to 
whom it belongs, or it may be lent to some other person. In the third 
and fourth chapters, I have endeavoured to examine the manner in 
which it operates in both these situations. The fifth and last chapter 
treats of the different effects which the different employments of 
capital immediately produce upon the quantity both of national 
industry, and of the annual produce of land and labour. 



CHAPTER I 


A man 
does not 
think of 
obtaining 
revenue 
from a 
small 
stock, 

but when 
he has 
more than 
enough 
for imme- 
diate con- 
sumption, 
he endea- 
vours to 
derive a 
revenue 
from the 
rest, 


using it 
either as 

(i) circu- 
lating 
capital, 


OF THE DIVISION OF STOCK 

When the stock which a man possesses is no more than sufficient to 
maintain him for a few days or a few weeks, he seldom thinks of de- 
riving any revenue from it. He consumes it as sparingly as he can, 
and endeavours by his labour to acquire something which may sup- 
ply its place before it be consumed altogether. His revenue is, in 
this case, derived from his labour only. This is the state of the 
greater part of the labouring poor in all countries. 

But when he possesses stock sufficient to maintain him for 
months or years, he naturally endeavours to derive a revenue from 
the greater part of it; reserving only so much for his immediate 
consumption as may maintain him till this revenue begins to come 
in. His whole stock, therefore, is distinguished into two parts. That 
part which, he expects, is to afford him this revenue, is called his 
capital. The other is that which supplies his immediate consump- 
tion; and which consists either, first, in that portion of his whole 
stock which was originally reserved for this purpose; or, secondly, 
in his revenue, from whatever source derived, as it gradually comes 
in; or, thirdly, in such things as had been purchased by either of 
these in former years, and which are not yet entirely consumed; 
such as a stock of clothes, household furniture, and the like. In one, 
or other, or all of these three articles, consists the stock which men 
commonly reserve for their own immediate consumption. 

There are two different ways in which a capital may be employed 
so as to yield a revenue or profit to its employer. 

First, it may be employed in raising, manufacturing, or purchas- 
ing goods, and selling them again with a profit. The capital em- 
ployed in this manner yields no revenue or profit to its employer, 
while it either remains in his possession, or continues in the same 
shape. The goods of the merchant yield him no revenue or profit 
till he sells them for money, and the money 5delds him as little till 
it is again exchanged for goods. His capital is continually going 
from him in one shape, and returning to him in another, and it is 

262 



DIVISION OF STOCK 263 

only by means of such circulation, or successive exchanges, that it 
can yield him any profit. Such capitals, therefore, may very prop- 
erly be called circulating capitals. 

Secondly, it may be employed in the improvement of land, in the 
purchase of useful machines and instruments of trade, or in such- 
like things as yield a revenue or profit without changing masters, 
or circulating any further. Such capitals, therefore, may very prop- 
erly be called fixed capitals. 

Different occupations require very different proportions between 
the fixed and circulating capitals employed in them. 

The capital of a merchant, for example, is altogether a circulat- 
ing capital. He has occasion for no machines or instruments of 
trade, unless his shop, or warehouse, be considered as such. 

Some part of the capital of every master artificer or manufac- 
turer must be fixed in the instruments of his trade. This part, how- 
ever, is very small in some, and very great in others. A master tay- 
lor requires no other instruments of trade but a parcel of needles. 
Those of the master shoemaker are a little, though but a very little, 
more expensive. Those of the weaver rise a good deal above those of 
the shoemaker. The far greater part of the capital of all such mas- 
ter artificers, however, is circulated, either in the wages of their 
workmen, or in the price of their materials, and repaid with a prof- 
it by the price of the work. 

In other works a much greater fixed capital is required. In a 
great iron-work, for example, the furnace for melting the ore, the 
forge, the slitt-mill, are instruments of trade which cannot be 
erected without a very great expence. In coal-works, and mines of 
every kind, the machinery necessary both for drawing out the 
water and for other purposes, is frequently still more expensive. 

That part of the capital of the farmer which is employed in the 
instruments of agriculture is a fixed; that which is employed in the 
wages and maintenance of his labouring servants, is a circulating 
capital. He makes a profit of the one by keeping it in his own pos- 
session, and of the other by parting with it. The price or value of 
his labouring cattle is a fixed capital in the same manner as that of 
the instruments of husbandry: Their maintenance is a circulating 
capital in the same manner as that of the labouring servants. The 
farmer makes his profit by keeping the labouring cattle, and by 
parting with their maintenance. Both the price and the mainte- 
nance of the cattle which are bought in and fattened, not for la- 
bour, but for sale, are a circulating capital. The farmer makes his 
profit by parting with them. A flock of sheep or a herd of cattle 
that, in a breeding country, is bought in, neither for labour, nor 


or (2) 
fixed capi- 
tal. 


Different 
propor- 
tions of 
fixed and 
circulat- 
ing capita] 
are re- 
quired in 
different 
trades. 



The stock 
of a so- 
ciety is 
divided in 
the same 
way into 

(i)the 
portion 
reserved 
for imme- 
diate con- 
sumption, 


264 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

for sale, but in order to make a profit by their wool, by their milk, 
and by their increase, is a fixed capital. The profit is made by 
keeping them. Their maintenance is a circulating capital. The prof- 
it is made by parting with it; and it comes back with both its own 
profit, and the profit upon the whole price of the cattle, in the 
price of the wool, the milk, and the increase. The whole value of 
the seed too is properly a fixed capital. Though it goes backwards 
and forwards between the ground and the granary, it never changes 
masters, and therefore does not properly circulate. The farmer 
makes his profit, not by its sale, but by its increase. 

The general stock of any country or society is the same with that 
of all its inhabitants or members, and therefore naturally divides 
itself into the same three portions, each of which has a distinct 
function or office. 

The First, is that portion which is reserved for immediate con- 
sumption, and of which the characteristic is that it affords no rev- 
enue or profit. It consists in the stock of food, clothes, household 
furniture, &c., which have been purchased by their proper consum- 
ers, but which are not yet entirely consumed. The whole stock of 
mere dwelling houses too subsisting at any one time in the country, 
make a part of this first portion. The stock that is laid out in a 
house, if it is to be the dwelling-house of the proprietor, ceases from 
that moment to serve in the function of a capital, or to afford any 
revenue to its owner. A dwelling-house, as such, contributes noth- 
ing to the revenue of its inhabitant; and though it is, no doubt, ex- 
tremely useful to him, it is as his clothes and household furniture 
are useful to him, which, however, make a part of his expence, and 
not of his revenue. If it is to be let to a tenant for rent, as the house 
itself can produce nothing,^ the tenant must always pay the rent 
out of some other revenue which he derives either from labour, or 
stock, or land. Though a house, therefore, may yield a revenue to 
its proprietor, and thereby serve in the function of a capital to him, 
it cannot yield any to the public, nor serve in the function of a cap- 
ital to it, and the revenue of the whole body of the people can never 
be in the smallest degree increased by it. Clothes, and household 
furniture, in the same manner, sometimes yield a revenue, and 
thereby serve in the function of a capital to particular persons. In 
countries where masquerades are common, it is a trade to let out 

^“Ce n’est pas cette maison qui produit elle-mSme ces mille francs. . . . Le 
loyer d’une maison n’est point pour la societe une augmentation de revenu, 
une creation de richesses nouveUes, il n’est au contraire qu’un mouvement, 
qu’un changement de main.”— Mercier de la Riviere, UOrdre naturel et es- 
sentiel des Sociitis poUtiques, lamo ed., 1767) vol. ii., p. 123, or in Daire’s 
PhysiocrateSf p. 487. 



DIVISION OF STOCK 265 

masquerade dresses for a night. Upholsterers frequently let furni- 
ture by the month or by the year. Undertakers let the furniture of 
funerals by ihe day and by the week. Many people let furnished 
houses, and get a rent, not only for the use of the house, but for 
that of the furniture. The revenue, however, which is derived from 
such things, must always be ultimately drawn from some other 
source of revenue. Of all parts of the stock, either of an individual, 
or of a society, reserved for immediate consumption, what is laid 
out in houses is most slowly consumed. A stock of clothes may last 
several years: a stock of furniture half a century or a century: but 
a stock of houses, well built and properly taken care of, may last 
many centuries. Though the period of their total consumption, 
however, is more distant, they are still as really a stock reserved 
for immediate consumption as either clothes or household 
furniture. 

The Second of the three portions into which the general stock of 
the society divides itself, is the fixed capital; of which the charac- 
teristic is, that it affords a revenue or profit without circulating or 
changing masters. It consists chiefly of the four following articles: 

First, of all useful machines and instruments of trade which fa- 
cilitate and abridge labour: 

Secondly, of all those profitable buildings which are the means of 
procuring a revenue, not only to their proprietor who lets them for 
a rent, but to the person who possesses them and pays that rent for 
them; such as shops, warehouses, workhouses, farmhouses, with all 
their necessary buildings; stables, granaries, &c. These are very 
different from mere dwelling houses. They are a sort of instruments 
of trade, and may be considered in the same light: 

Thirdly, of the improvements of land, of what has been profit- 
ably laid out in clearing, draining, enclosing, manuring, and reduc- 
ing it into the condition most proper for tillage and culture. An im- 
proved farm may very justly be regarded in the same light as those 
useful machines which facilitate and abridge labour, and by 
means of which, an equal circulating capital can afford a much 
greater revenue to its employer. An improved farm is equally ad- 
vantageous and more durable than any of those machines, fre- 
quently requiring no other repairs than the most profitable appli- 
cation of the farmer’s capital employed in cultivating it: 

Fourthly, of the acquired and useful abilities of all the inhabi- 
tants or members of the society. The acquisition of such talents, 
by the maintenance of the acquirer during his education, study, or 
apprenticeship, always costs a real expence, which is a capital fixed 
and realized, as it were, in his person. Those talents, as they make 


(2) the 
feed capi- 
tal, which 
consists of 

(a) useful 
machines, 

(h) pro- 
fitable 
buildings, 


(c) im- 
prove- 
ments of 
land, 


and (d) 
acquir^ 
and use- 
ful abili- 
ties, 



and ( 3 ) 
the circu- 
lating 
capital, 
which 
consists of 

(а) the 
money, 

(б) the 
stock of 
provisions 
in the pos- 
session of 
the sellers, 

(c) the 
materials 
of clothes, 
furniture, 
and build- 
ings, 

and (d) 
completed 
work in 
the hands 
of the 
merchant 
or manu- 
facturer. 


The last 
three 
parts of 
the circu- 
lating 
capital are 
regularly 
with- 
drawn 
from it 


266 the wealth of nations 

a part of his fortune, so do they likewise of that of the society to 
which he belongs. The improved dexterity of a workman may be 
considered in the same light as a machine or instrument of trade 
which facilitates and abridges labour, and which, though it costs a 
certain expence, repays that expence with a profit.^ 

The Third and last of the three portions into which the general 
stock of the society naturally divides itself, is the circulating capi- 
tal; of which the characteristic is, that it affords a revenue only by 
circulating or changing masters. It is composed likewise of four 
parts: 

First, of the money by means of which all the other three are cir- 
culated and distributed to their proper consumers:® 

Secondly, of the stock of provisions which are in the possession 
of the butcher, the grazier, the farmer, the corn-merchant, the 
brewer, &c. and from the sale of which they expect to derive a 
profit: 

Thirdly, of the materials, whether altogether rude, or more or 
less manufactured, of clothes, furniture and building, which are not 
yet made up into any of those three shapes, but which remain in 
the hands of the growers, the manufacturers, the mercers, and 
drapers, the timber-merchants, the carpenters and joiners, the 
brick-makers, &c. 

Fourthly, and lastly, of the work which is made up and com- 
pleted, but which is still in the hands of the merchant or manufac- 
turer, and not yet disposed of or distributed to the proper con- 
sumers; such as the finished work which we frequently find ready- 
made in the shops of the smith, the cabinet-maker, the goldsmith, 
the jeweller, the china-merchant, &c. The circulating capital con- 
sists in this manner, of the provisions, materials, and finished work 
of all kinds that are in the hands of their respective dealers, and of 
the money that is necessary for circulating and distributing them 
to those who are finally to use, or to consume them. 

Of these four parts three, provisions, materials, and finished 
work, are, either annually, or in a longer or shorter period, regu- 
larly withdrawn from it, and placed either in the fixed capital or 
in the stock reserved for immediate consumption. 

Every fixed capital is both originally derived from, and requires 
to be continually supported by a circulating capital All useful ma- 
chines and instruments of trade are originally derived from a cir- 
culating capital, which furnishes the materials of which they are 

“ But in bk i , ch x , the remuneration of improved dexterity is treated as 
wages 

® Ed. I reads “users and consumers” here and eleven lines lower 



DIVISION or STOCK -^7 

made, and the maintenance of the workmen who make them. They 
require too a capital of the same kind to keep them in constant 
repair. 

No fixed capital can yield any revenue but by means of a circu- 
lating capital. The most useful machines and instruments of trade 
will produce nothing without the circulating capital which affords 
the materials they are employed upon, and the maintenance of the 
workmen who employ them. Land, however improved, will yield no 
revenue without a circulating capital, which maintains the la- 
bourers who cultivate and collect its produce. 

To maintain and augment the stoi which may be reserved for 
immediate consumption, is the. sole end and purpose both of the 
fixed and circulating capitals. It is this stock which feeds, clothes, 
and lodges the people. Their riches or poverty depends upon the 
abundant or sparing supplies which those two capitals can afford to 
the stock reserved for immediate consumption. 

So great a part of the circulating capital being continually with- 
drawn from it, in order to be placed in the other two branches of 
the general stock of the society; it must in its turn require contin- 
ual supplies, without which it would soon cease to exist. These sup- 
plies are principally drawn from three sources, the produce of land, 
of mines, and of fisheries. These afford continual supplies of pro- 
visions and materials, of which part is afterwards wrought up into 
finished work, and by which are replaced the provisions, materials 
and finished work continually withdrawn from the circulating capi- 
tal. From mines too is drawn what is necessary for maintaining and 
augmenting that part of it which consists in money. For though, in 
the ordinary course of business, this part is not, like the other three, 
necessarily withdrawn from it, in order to be placed in the other 
two branches of the general stock of the society, it must, however, 
like all other things, be wasted and worn out at last, and sometimes 
too be either lost or sent abroad, and must, therefore, require con- 
tinual, though, no doubt, much smaller supplies. 

Land, mines, and fisheries, require all both a fixed and a circu- 
lating capital to cultivate them: and their produce replaces with a 
profit, not only those capitals, but all the others in the society. 
Thus the farmer annually replaces to the manufacturer the provi- 
sions which he had consumed and the materials which he had 
wrought up the year before; and the manufacturer replaces to the 
farmer the finished work which he had wasted and worn out in the 
same time. This is the real exchange that is annually made be- 
tween those two orders of people, though it seldom happens that 
the rude produce of the one and the manufactured produce of the 


Evei> 
fixed cap- 
ital is de- 
rived 
from and 
supported 
by a cir- 
culating 
capital, 

and can- 
not yield 
any reve- 
nue with- 
out it. 

The end 
of both 
fixed and 
circulat- 
ing capi- 
tal is to 
maintain 
and aug- 
ment the 
other part 
of the 
stock. 

The cir- 
culating 
capital is 
kept up 
by the 
produce 
of land, 
mines, 
and fish- 
eries, 


which re- 
quire 
both fixefl 
and circu- 
lating 
capitals to 
cultivate 
them, 



and, when 
their fer- 
tility is 
equal, 
yield pro- 
duce pro- 
portion- 
ate to the 
capital 
employed 

Where 
there is 
tolerable 
security 
all stock 
is em- 
ployed in 
one or 
other of 
the three 
ways 

Butin 
countries 
where 
violence 
prevails 
much 
stock is 
buried 
and con- 
cealed 


268 the wealth of nations 

Other, are directly bartered for one another; because it seldom hap- 
pens that the farmer sells his corn and his cattle, his flax and his 
wool, to the very same person of whom he chuses to purchase the 
clothes, furniture, and instruments of trade which he wants. He 
sells, therefore, his rude produce for money, with which he can pur- 
chase, wherever it is to be had, the manufactured produce he has 
occasion for. Land even replaces, in part at least, the capitals with 
which fisheries and mines are cultivated. It is the produce of land 
which draws the fish from the waters; and it is the produce of the 
surface of the earth which extracts the minerals from its bowels. 

The produce of land, mines, and fisheries, when their natural 
fertility is equal, is in proportion to the extent and proper applica- 
tion of the capitals employed about them. When the capitals are 
equal and equally well applied, it is in proportion to their natural 
fertility. 

In adl countries where there is tolerable security, every man of 
common understanding will endeavour to employ whatever stock he 
can command, in procuring either present enjoyment or future prof- 
it. If it is employed in procuring present enjoyment, it is a stock 
reserved for immediate consumption. If it is employed in procuring 
future profit, it must procure this profit either by staying with him, 
or by going from him. In the one case it is a fixed, in the other it 
is a circulating capital. A man must be perfectly crazy who, where 
there is tolerable security, does not employ all the stock which he 
commands, whether it be his own or borrowed of other people, in 
some one or other of those three ways. 

In those unfortunate countries, indeed, where men are continu- 
ally afraid of the violence of their superiors, they frequently bury 
and conceal a great part of their stock, in order to have it always at 
hand to carry with them to some place of safety, in case of their 
being threatened with any of those disasters to which they con- 
sider themselves as at all times exposed. This is said to be a com- 
mon practice in Turkey, in Indostan, and, I believe, in most other 
governments of Asia. It seems to have been a common practice 
among our ancestors during the violence of the feudal government. 
Treasure-trove was in those times considered as no contemptible 
part of the revenue of the greatest sovereigns in Europe. It consist- 
ed in such treasure as was found concealed in the earth, and to 
which no particular person could prove any right. This was re- 
garded in those times as so important an object, that it was always 
considered as belonging to the sovereign, and neither to the finder 
nor to the proprietor of the land, unless the right to it had been 
conveyed to the latter by an express clause in his charter. It was 



DIVISION OF STOCK 269 

put upon the same footing with gold and silver mines, which, with- 
out a special clause in the charter, were never supposed to be com- 
prehended in the general grant of the lands, though mines of lead, 
copper, tin, and coal were, as things of smaller consequence. 



CHAPTER II 


Prices are 

divided 

into three 

parts, 

wages, 

profits, 

and rent, 


and the 
whole an- 
nual pro- 
duce is di- 
vided into 
the same 
three 
parts; 


but we 
may dis- 
tinguish 
between 
gross and 
net reve- 
nue 

Gross 
rent is the 
whole 
sum paid 
by the 


OF MONEY CONSIDERED AS A PARTICULAR BRANCH OF THE GENERAL 
STOCK OF THE SOCIETY, OR OF THE EXPENCE OF MAINTAINING 
THE NATIONAL CAPITAL 

It has been shewn in the first Book, that the price of the greater 
part of commodities resolves itself into three parts, of which one 
pays the wages of the labour, another the profits of the stock, and 
a third the rent of the land which had been employed in producing 
and bringing them to market: that there are, indeed, some com- 
modities of which the price is made up of two of those parts only, 
the wages of labour, and the profits of stock: and a very few in 
which it consists altogether in one, the wages of labour: but that 
the price of every commodity necessarily resolves itself into some 
one, or other, or all of these three parts ; every part of it which goes 
neither to rent nor to wages, being necessarily profit to somebody. 

Since this is the case, it has been observed, with regard to every 
particular commodity, taken separately; it must be so with regard 
to all the commodities which compose the whole annual produce of 
the land and labour of every country, taken complexly. The whole 
price or exchangeable value of that annual produce, must resolve 
itself into the same three parts, and be parcelled out among the 
different inhabitants of the country, either as the wages of their 
labour, the profits of their stock, or the rent of their land. 

But though the whole value of the annual produce of the land 
and labour of every country is thus divided among and constitutes 
a revenue to its different inhabitants; yet as in the rent of a private 
estate we distinguish between the gross rent and the neat rent, so 
may we likewise in the revenue of all the inhabitants of a great 
country. 

The gross rent of a private estate comprehends whatever is paid 
by the farmer; the neat rent^what remains free to the landlord, 
after deducting the expence of management, of repairs, and all 
other necessary charges; or what, without hurting his estate, he can 

270 



MONEY 271 

afford to place in his stock reserved for immediate consumption, or 
to spend upon his table, equipage, the ornaments of his house and 
furniture, his private enjoyments and amusements. His real wealth 
is in proportion, not to his gross, but to his neat rent. 

The gross revenue of all the inhabitants of a great country, com- 
prehends the whole annual produce of their land and labour; the 
neat revenue, what remains free to them after deducting the ex- 
pence of maintaining; first, their fixed; and, secondly, their cir- 
culating capital; or what, without encroaching upon their capital, 
they can place in their stock reserved for immediate consumption, 
or spend upon their subsistence, conveniences, and amusements. 
Their real wealth too is in proportion, not to their gross, but to 
their fieat revenue. 

The whole expence of maintaining the fixed capital, must evi- 
dently be excluded from the neat revenue of the society. Neither 
the materials necessary for supporting their useful machines and 
instruments of trade, their profitable buildings, &c. nor the produce 
of the labour necessary for fashioning those materials into the 
proper form, can ever make any part of it. The price of that labour 
may indeed make a part of it; as the workmen so employed may 
place the whole value of their wages in their stock reserved for im- 
mediate consumption. But in other sorts of labour, both the price 
and the produce go to this stock, the price to that of the workmen, 
the produce to that of other people, whose subsistence, conven- 
iencies, and amusements, are augmented by the labour of those 
workmen. 

The intention of the fixed capital is to increase the productive 
powers of labour, or to enable the same number of labourers to per- 
form a much greater quantity of work. In a farm where all the 
necessary buildings, fences, drains, communications, &c. are in the 
most perfect good order, the same number of labourers and labour- 
ing cattle will raise a much greater produce, than in one of equal 
extent and equally good ground, but not furnished with equal con- 
veniencies. In manufactures the same number of hands, assisted 
with the best machinery, will work up a much greater quantity of 
goods than with more imperfect instruments of trade. The expence 
which is properly laid out upon a fixed capital of any kind, is always 
repaid with great profit, and increases the annual produce by a 
much greater value than that of the support which such improve- 
ments require. This support, however, still requires a certain por- 
tion of that produce. A certain quantity of materials, and the labour 
of a certain number of workmen, bodi of which might have been 
immediately employed to augment the food, clothing and lodging, 


farmer j 
net rent 
what is 
left free 
to the 
landloid. 

Gross re- 
venue is 
the whole 
annual 
produce* 
net reve- 
nue what 
is left free 
after de- 
ducting 
the main- 
tenance 
of fixed 
and circu- 
lating 
capital. 

The 

whole ex- 
pence of 
main- 
taining 
the fixed 
capital 
must be 
excluded, 


since the 
only ob- 
ject of the 
fixed cap- 
ital is to 
increase 
the pro- 
ductive 
powers of 
labour, 



and any 
cheapen- 
ing or 
simplifica- 
tion is re- 
garded as 
a good. 


The cost 
of main- 
taining 
the fixed 
capital is 
like the 
cost of 
repairs on 
an estate, 


but the 
expenceof 
maintain- 
ing the 
last three 
parts of 
the circu- 
lating 
capital is 
not to be 
deducted, 


272 the wealth of nations 

the subsistence and conveniencies of the society, are thus diverted 
to another employment, highly advantageous indeed, but still dif- 
ferent from this one. It is upon this account that all such improve- 
ments in mechanics, as enable the same number of workmen to 
perform an equal quantity of work with cheaper and simpler ma- 
chinery than had been usual before, are always regarded as advan- 
tageous to every society. A certain quantity of materials, and the 
labour of a certain number of workmen, which had before been 
employed in supporting a more complex and expensive machinery, 
can afterwards be applied to augment the quantity of work which 
that or any other machinery is useful only for performing. The un- 
dertaker of some great manufactory who employs a thousand 
a-year in the maintenance of his machinery, if he can reduce this 
expence to five hundred, will naturally ^ employ the other five hun- 
dred in purchasing an additional quantity of materials to be 
wrought up by an additional number of workmen. The quantity of 
that work, therefore, which his machinery was useful only for per- 
forming, will naturally be augmented, and with it all the advan- 
tage and conveniency which the society can derive from that work. 

The expence of maintaining the fixed capital in a great country, 
may very properly be compared to that of repairs in a private 
estate. The expence of repairs may frequently be necessary for sup- 
porting the produce of the estate, and consequently both the gross 
and the neat rent of the landlord. When by a more proper direction, 
however, it can be diminished without occasioning any diminution 
of produce, the gross rent remains at least the same as before, and 
the neat rent is necessarily augmented. 

But though the whole expence of maintaining the fixed capital is 
thus necessarily excluded from the neat revenue of the society, it is 
not the same case with that of maintaining the circulating capital. 
Of the four parts of which this latter capital is composed, money, 
provisions, materials, and finished work, the three last, it has al- 
ready been observed, are regularly withdrawn from it, and placed 
either in the fixed capital of the society, or in their stock reserved 
for immediate consumption. Whatever portion of those consumable 
goods is not employed in maintaining the former, goes all to the 
latter, and makes a part of the neat revenue of the society. The 
maintenance of those three parts of the circulating capital, there- 
fore, withdraws no portion of the annual produce from the neat 
revenue of the society, besides what is necessary for maintaining 
the fixed capital. 

There seems no reason whatever for supposing that this is necessarily the 
“natural’* action. 



MONEY 


273 


The circulating capital of a society is in this respect different 
from that of an individual. That of an individual is totally exclud- 
ed from making any part of his neat revenue, which must consist 
altogether in his profits. But though the circulating capital of every 
individual makes a part of that of the society to whidi he belongs, 
it is not upon that account totally excluded from making a part 
likewise of their neat revenue. Though the whole goods in a mer- 
chant’s shop must by no means be placed in his own stock reserved 
for immediate consumption, they may in that of other people, who, 
from a revenue derived from other funds, may regularly replace 
their value to him, together with its profits, without occasioning 
any diminution either of his capital or of theirs.^ 

Money, therefore, is the only part of the circulating capital of a 
society, of which the maintenance can occasion any diminution in 
their neat revenue. 

The fixed capital, and that part of the circulating capital which 
consists in money, so far as they affect the revenue of the society, 
bear a very great resemblance to one another. 

First, as those machines and instruments of trade, &c. require a 
certain expence, first to erect them, and afterwards to support them, 
both which expences, though they make a part of the gross, are de- 
ductions from the neat revenue of the society; so the stock of 
money which circulates in any country must require a certain ex- 
pence, first to collect it, and afterwards to support it, both which 
expences, though they make a part of the gross, are, in the same 
manner, deductions from the neat revenue of the society. A certain 
quantity of very valuable materials, gold and silver, and of very 
curious labour, instead of augmenting the stock reserved for im- 
mediate consumption, the subsistence, conveniencies, and amuse- 
ments of individuals, is employed in supporting that great but ex- 
pensive instrument of commerce, by means of which every indi- 
vidual in the society has his subsistence, conveniencies, and amuse- 
ments, regularly distributed to him in their proper proportion. 

Secondly, as the machines and instruments of trade, &c. which 
compose the fixed capital either of an mdividual or of a society, 
make no part either of the gross or of the neat revenue of either; so 
money, by means of which the whole revenue of the society is regu- 
larly distributed among all its different members, makes itself no 
part of that revenue. The great wheel of circulation is altogether 


the circu- 
lating 
capital of 
the so- 
ciety be- 
ing differ- 
ent in this 
respect 
from that 
of an in- 
dividual. 


The 

mainten- 
ance of 
the money 
alone 
must be 
deducted. 

The 

money re- 
sembles 
the fixed 
capital, 
since 

(i) the 
mainten- 
ance of 
the stock 
of money 
is part of 
the gross 
but not of 
the net 
revenue. 


and (2) 
the 

money 
itself 
forms no 
part of 
the net 
revenue. 


® In this paragraph the capital or stock of goods is confused with the goods 
themselves. The goods of which the stock consists may become revenue, but 
the stock itself cannot. The maintenance of a stock, even of perishable and 
consumable goods, does form a charge on the labour of the society 



274 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


It only 
appears to 
do so 
from the 
ambiguity 
of lan- 
guage, 

sums of 
money 
being 
often used 
to indi- 
cate the 
goods 
purchas- 
able as 
well as 
the coins 
them- 
selves. 


We must 
not add 
both to- 
gether. 


If a man 
has a 
guinea a 
week he 
enjoys a 
guinea’s 
worth of 
subast- 


different from the goods which are circulated by means of it. The 
revenue of the society consists altogether in those goods, and not 
in the wheel which circulates them. In computing either the gross or 
the neat revenue of any society, we must always, from their whole 
annual circulation of money and goods, deduct the whole value of 
the money, of which not a single farthing can ever make any part 
of either.^ 

It is the ambiguity of language only which can make this propo- 
sition appear either doubtful or paradoxical. When properly ex- 
plained and understood, it is almost self-evident. 

When we talk of any particular sum of money, we sometimes 
mean nothing but the metal pieces of which it is composed; and 
sometimes we include in our meaning some obscure reference to the 
goods which can be had in exchange for it, or to the power of pur- 
chasing which the possession of it conveys. Thus when we say, that 
the circulating money of England has been computed at eighteen 
millions, we mean only to express the amount of the metal pieces, 
which some writers have computed, or rather have supposed to cir- 
culate in that country. But when we say that a man is worth fifty or 
a hundred pounds a-year, we mean commonly to express not only 
the amount of the metal pieces which are annually paid to him, but 
the value of the goods which he can annually purchase or consume. 
We mean commonly to ascertain what is or ought to be his way of 
living, or the quantity and quality of the necessaries and conven- 
iencies of life in which he can with propriety indulge himself. 

When, by any particular sum of money, we mean not only to ex- 
press the amount of the metal pieces of which it is composed, but 
to include in its signification some obscure reference to the goods 
which can be had in exchange for them, the wealth or revenue which 
it in this case denotes, is equal only to one of the two values which 
are thus intimated somewhat ambiguously by the same word, and 
to the latter more properly than to the former, to the money’s 
worth more properly than to the money. 

Thus if a guinea be the weekly pension of a particular person, he 
can in the course of the week purchase with it a certain quantity of 
subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements. In proportion as this 
quantity is great or small, so are his real riches, his real weekly 
revenue. His weekly revenue is certainly not equal both to the 
guinea, and to what can be purchased with it, but only to one or 

*If it were not for the use of the old-fashioned term “circulation” instead 
of the newer “produce,” the explanation which follows would be unnecessary. 
No one could be suspected of a desire to add all the money to the annual 
produce. 



MONEY 


275 


Other of those two equal values; and to the latter more properly 
than to the former, to the guinea’s worth rather than to the guinea. 

If the pension of such a person was paid to him, not in gold, but 
in a weekly bill for a guinea, his revenue surely would not so prop- 
erly consist in the piece of paper, as in what he could get for it. A 
guinea may be considered as a bill for a certain quantity of neces- 
saries and conveniences upon all the tradesmen in the neighbour- 
hood. The revenue of the person to whom it is paid, does not so 
properly consist in the piece of gold, as in what he can get for it, 
or in what he can exchange it for. If it could be exchanged for noth- 
ing, it would, like a bill upon a bankrupt, be of no more value than 
the most useless piece of paper. 

Though the weekly or yearly revenue of all the different inhab- 
itants of any country, in the same manner, may be, and in reality 
frequently is paid to them in money, their real riches, however, the 
real weekly or yearly revenue of all of them taken together, must 
always be great or small in proportion to the quantity of consum- 
able goods which they can all of them purchase with this money. 
The whole revenue of all of them taken together is evidently not 
equal to both the money and the consumable goods; but only to 
one or other of those two values, and to the latter more properly 
than to the former. 

Though we frequently, therefore, express a person’s revenue by 
the metal pieces which are annually paid to him, it is because the 
amount of those pieces regulates the extent of his power of pur- 
chasing, or the value of the goods which he can annually afford to 
consume. We still consider his revenue as consisting in this power 
of purchasing or consuming, and not in the pieces which convey it. 

But if this is sufficiently evident even with regard to an indi- 
vidual, it is still more so with regard to a society. The amount of 
the metal pieces which are annually paid to an individual, is often 
precisely equal to his revenue, and is upon that account the shortest 
and best expression of its value. But the amount of the metal pieces 
which circulate in a society, can never be equal to the revenue of 
all its members. As the same guinea which pays the weekly pen- 
sion of one man to-day, may pay that of another to-morrow, and 
that of a third the day thereafter, the amount of the metal pieces 
which annually circulate in any country, must always be of much 
less value than the whole money pensions annually paid with them. 
But the power of purchasing, or the goods which can successively 
be bought with the whole of those money pensions as they are suc- 
cessively paid, must always be precisely of the same value with 


ence, &c. 

and his 
real reve- 
nue is 
that sub- 
sistence, 
&c. 


The same 
is true of 
all the in- 
habitants 
of a coun- 
try. 


The coins 
annually 
paid to an 
individual 
often 
equal his 
revenue, 
but the 
stock of 
coin in a 
society is 
never 
equal to 
its whole 
revenue. 


* Ed. I does not contain “or.’ 



Money is 
therefore 
no part of 
the reve- 
nue of the 
society. 


( 3 ) 

Every 
saving in 
the cost 
of main- 
taining 
the stock 
of money 
is an im- 
prove- 
ment. 


The sub- 
stitution 
of paper 
for gold 
money is 
an im- 
prove- 
ment. 


276 the wealth of nations 

those pensions; as must likewise be the revenue of the different per- 
sons to whom they are paid. That revenue, therefore, cannot con- 
sist in those metal pieces, of which the amount is so much inferior 
to its value, but in the power of purchasing, in the goods which can 
successively be bought with them as they circulate from hand to 
hand. 

Money, therefore, the great wheel of circulation, the great in- 
strument of commerce, like all other instruments of trade, though 
it makes a part and a very valuable part of the capital, makes no 
part of the revenue of the society to which it belongs; and though 
the metal pieces of which it is composed, in the course of their an- 
nual circulation, distribute to every man the revenue which proper- 
ly belongs to him, they make themselves no part of that revenue. 

Thirdly, and lastly, the machines and instruments of trade, &c. 
which compose the fixed capital, bear this further resemblance to 
that part of the circulating capital which consists in money; that 
as every saving in the expence of erecting and supporting those 
machines, which does not diminish the productive powers of labour, 
is an improvement of the neat revenue of the society; so every sav- 
ing in the expence of collecting and supporting that part of the cir- 
culating capital which consists in money, is an improvement of 
exactly the same kind. 

It is sufficiently obvious, and it has partly too been explained 
already, in what manner every saving in the expence of supporting 
the fixed capital is an improvement of the neat revenue of the so- 
ciety. The whole capital of the undertaker of every work is neces- 
sarily divided between his fixed and his circulating capital. While 
his whole capital remains the same, the smaller the one part, the 
greater must necessarily be the other. It is the circulating capital 
which furnishes the materials and wages of labour, and puts in- 
dustry into motion. Every saving, therefore, in the expence of 
maintaining the fixed capital, which does not diminish the pro- 
ductive powers of labour, must increase the fund which puts indus- 
try into motion, and consequently the annual produce of land and 
labour, the real revenue of every society. 

The substitution of paper in the room of gold and silver money, 
replaces a very expensive instrument of commerce with one much 
less costly, and sometimes equally convenient. Circulation comes to 
be carried on by a new wheel, which it costs less both to erect and to 
maintain than the old one. But in what manner this operation is 
performed, and in what manner it tends to increase either the gross 
or the neat revenue of the society, is not altogether so obvious, and 
may therefore require some further explication. 



MONEY 277 

There are several different sorts of paper money; but the cir- 
culating notes of banks and bankers are the species which is best 
known, and which seems best adapted for this purpose. 

When the people of any particular country have such confidence 
in the fortune, probity, and prudence of a particular banker, as to 
believe that he is always ready to pay upon demand such of his 
promissory notes as are likely to be at any time presented to him; 
those notes come to have the same currency as gold and silver 
money, from the confidence that such money can at any time be had 
for them. 

A particular banker lends among his customers his own promis- 
sory notes, to the extent, we shall suppose, of a hundred thousand 
pounds. As those notes serve all the purposes of money, his debtors 
pay him the same interesj: as if he had lent them so much money. 
This interest is the source of his gain. Though some of those notes 
are continually coming back upon him for payment, part of them 
continue to circulate for months and years together. Though he has 
generally in circulation, therefore, notes to the extent of a hundred 
thousand pounds, twenty thousand pounds in gold and silver may, 
frequently, be a sufficient provision for answering occasional de- 
mands. By this operation, therefore, twenty thousand pounds in 
gold and silver perform all the functions which a hundred thousand 
could otherwise have performed. The same exchanges may be made, 
the same quantity of consumable goods may be circulated and dis- 
tributed to their proper consumers, by means of his promissory 
notes, to the value of a hundred thousand pounds, as by an equal 
value of gold and silver money. Eighty thousand pounds of gold 
and silver, therefore, can, in this manner, be spared from the cir- 
culation of the country; and if different operations of the same 
kind should, at the same time, be carried on by many different 
banks and bankers, the whole circulation may thus be conducted 
with a fifth part only of the gold and silver which would otherwise 
have been requisite. 

Let us suppose, for example, that the whole circulating money 
of some particular country amounted, at a particular time, to one 
million sterling, that sum being then sufficient for circulating the 
whole annual produce of their land and labour. Let us suppose too, 
that some time thereafter, different banks and bankers issued prom- 
issory notes, payable to the bearer, to the extent of one million, re- 
serving in their different coffers two hundred thousand pounds for 
answering occasional demands. There would remain, therefore, in 
circulation, eight hundred thousand pounds in gold and silver, and 
a million of bank notes, or eighteen hundred thousand pounds of 


Bank 
notes are 
the best 
sort of 
paper 
money. 


When a 
banker 
lends out 
£100,000 
in notes 
and keeps 
in hand 
only 
£20,000 
in gold 
and silver. 
£80,000 
in gold 
and silver 
is spared 
from the 
circula- 
tion: 


and if 
many 
bankers 
do the 
same, 
four- 
fifths of 
the gold 
and silver 
previous- 
ly circu- 
lating 
maybe 
sent 
abroad, 



and ex- 
changed 
for goods, 


either to 
supply the 
consump- 
tion of 
another 
country, 
in which 
case the 
profit will 
be an ad- 
dition to 
the net re- 
venue of 
the coun- 
try, 


or to sup- 


27S the wealth of nations 

paper and money together. But the annual produce of the land and 
labour of the country had before required only one million to cir- 
culate and distribute it to its proper consumers, and that annual 
produce cannot be immediately augmented by those operations of 
banking. One million, therefore, will be sufficient to circulate it after 
them. The goods to be bought and sold being precisely the same as 
before, the same quantity of money will be sufficient for buying and 
selling them. The channel of circulation, if I may be allowed such 
an expression, will remain precisely the same as before. One million 
we have supposed sufficient to fill that channel. Whatever, there- 
fore, is poured into it beyond this sum, cannot run in it, but must 
overflow. One million eight hundred thousand pounds are poured 
into it. Eight hundred thousand pounds, therefore, must overflow, 
that sum being over and above what can be employed in the cir- 
culation of the country. But though this sum cannot be employed at 
home, it is too valuable to be allowed to lie idle. It will, therefore, 
be sent abroad, in order to seek that profitable employment which 
it cannot find at home. But the paper cannot go abroad; because at 
a distance from the banks which issue it, and from the country in 
which payment of it can be exacted by law, it will not be received 
in common payments. Gold and silver, therefore, to the amount of 
eight hundred thousand pounds will be sent abroad, and the chan- 
nel of home circulation will remain filled with a million of paper, 
instead of the million of those metals which filled it before. 

But though so great a quantity of gold and silver is thus sent 
abroad, we must not imagine that it is sent abroad for nothing, or 
that its proprietors make a present of it to foreign nations. They 
will exchange it for foreign goods of some kind or another, in order 
to supply the consumption either of some other foreign country, or 
of their own. 

If they employ it in purchasing goods in one foreign country in 
order to supply the consumption of another, or in what is called the 
carrying trade, whatever profit they make will be an addition to the 
neat revenue of their own country. It is like a new fund, created for 
carrying on a new trade; domestic business being now transacted 
by paper, and the gold and silver being converted into a fund for 
this new trade. 

If they employ it in purchasing foreign goods for home consump- 
tion, they may either, first, purchase such goods as are likely to be 
consumed by idle people who produce nothing, such as foreign 
wines, foreign silks, &c.; or, secondly, they may purchase an addi- 
tional stock of materials, tools, and provisions, in order to main- 
tain and employ an additional number of industrious people, who 



HONEY 279 

re-produce, with a profit, the value of their annual consumption. 

So far as it is employed in the first way, it promotes prodigality, 
increases expence and consumption without increasing production, 
or establishing any permanent fund for supporting that expence, 
and is in every respect hurtful to the society. 

So far as it is employed in the second way, it promotes indus- 
try; and though it increases the consumption of the society, it pro- 
vides a permanent fund for supporting that consumption, the peo- 
ple who consume re-producing, with a profit, the whole value of 
their annual consumption. The gross revenue of the society, the 
annual produce of their land and labour, is increased by the whole 
value which the labour of those workmen adds to the materials 
upon which they are employed; and their neat revenue by what 
remains of this value, after deducting what is necessary for sup- 
porting the tools and instruments of their trade. 

That the greater part of the gold and silver which, being forced 
abroad by those operations of banking, is employed in purchasing 
foreign goods for home consumption, is and must be employed in 
purchasing those of this second kind, seems not only probable but 
almost unavoidable. Though some particular men may sometimes 
increase their expence very considerably though their revenue does 
not increase at all, we may be assured that no class or order of men 
ever does so; because, though the principles of common prudence 
do not always govern the conduct of every individual, they always 
influence that of the majority of every class or order. But the rev- 
enue of idle people, considered as a class or order, cannot, in the 
smallest degree, be increased by those operations of banking. Their 
expence in general, therefore, cannot be much increased by them, 
though that of a few individuals among them may, and in reality 
sometimes is. The demand of idle people, therefore, for foreign 
goods, being the same, or very nearly the same, as before, a very 
small part of the money, which being forced abroad by those opera- 
tions of banking, is employed in purchasing foreign goods for home 
consumption, is likely to be employed in purchasing those for their 
use. The greater part of it will naturally be destined for the employ- 
ment of industry, and not for the maintenance of idleness. 

When we compute the quantity of industry which the circulating 
capital of any society can employ, we must always have regard to 
those parts of it only, which consist in provisions, materials, and 
finished work: the other, which consists in money, and which serves 
only to circulate those three, must always be deducted. In order to 
put industry into motion, three things are requisite; materials to 
work upon, tools to work with, and the wages or recompence for the 


ply home 
consump- 
tion (i) 
of lux- 
uries, (2) 
of materi- 
als, tools 
and pro- 
visions 
where- 
with in- 
dustrious 
people are 
main- 
tained 
and em- 
ployed 

If to sup- 
ply lux- 
uries, pro- 
digality 
and con- 
sumption 
are in- 
creased; 

if to sup- 
ply mate- 
rials, &c., 
a per- 
manent 
fund for 
support- 
ing con- 
sumption 
is pro- 
vided 

The great- 
er part of 
the gold 
and silver 
sent 
abroad 
purchases 
materials, 
&c. 


The quan- 
tity of in- 
dustry 
which the 
circulat- 
ing capital 
can em- 
ploy is 
deter- 



mined by 
the provi- 
sions, ma- 
terials, 
and fin- 
ished 
work, and 
not at all 
by the 
quantity 
of money. 


The sub- 
stitution 
of paper 
for gold 
and silver 
increases 
the mate- 
rials, 

tools, and 
mainte- 
nance at 
the ex- 
pence of 
the gold 
and silver 
money. 

The 

quantity 
of money 
bears a 
small pro- 
portion to 
the whole 
produce, 
but a 
large one 
to that 
part des- 
tined to 
maintain 
industry. 


280 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

sake of which the work is done. Money is neither a material to work 
upon^ nor a tool to work with; and though the wages of the work- 
man are commonly paid to him in money, his real revenue, like that 
of all other men, consists, not in the money, but in the money’s 
worth; not in the metal pieces, but in what can be got for them. 

The quantity of industry which any capital can employ, must, 
evidently, be equal to the number of workmen whom it can supply 
with materials, tools, and a maintenance suitable to the nature of 
the work. Money may be requisite for purchasing the materials and 
tools of the work, as well as the maintenance of the workmen. But 
the quantity of industry which the whole capital can employ, is 
certainly not equal both to the money which purchases, and to the 
materials, tools, and maintenance, which are purchased with it; but 
only to one or other of those two values, and to the latter more 
properly than to the former. 

^en paper is substituted in the room of gold and silver money, 
the quantity of the materials, tools, and maintenance, which the 
whole circulating capital can supply, may be increased by the whole 
value of gold and silver which used to be employed in purchasing 
them. The whole value of the great wheel of circulation and dis- 
tribution, is added to the goods which are circulated and distrib- 
uted by means of it. The operation, in some measure, resembles that 
of the undertaker of some great work, who, in consequence of some 
improvement in mechanics, takes down his old machinery, and adds 
the difference between its price and that of the new to his circulat- 
ing capital, to the fund from which he furnishes materials and 
wages to his workmen.® 

What is the proportion which the circulating money of any coun- 
try bears to the whole value of the annual produce circulated by 
means of it, it is, perhaps, impossible to determine. It has been 
computed by different authors at a fifth, at a tenth, at a twentieth, 
and at a thirtieth part of that value.® But how small soever the pro- 
portion which the circulating money may bear to the whole value of 
the annual produce, as but a part, and frequently but a small part, 
of that produce, is ever destined for the maintenance of industry, it 
must always bear a very considerable proportion to that part. When, 
therefore, by the substitution of paper, the gold and silver neces- 
sary for circulation is reduced to, perhaps, a fifth part of the for- 
mer quantity, if the value of only the greater part of the other four- 

® Above, pp. 271, 272. 

® Petty’s estimate in Verbum Sapienti is £40,000,000 for the income and £6,- 
000,000 for the coin. Gregory King’s estimate is £43,500,000 for the income 
and no less than £11,500,000 for the coin, in Geo. Chalmers, Estimate, 1802, 
pp. 423, 427. 



MONEY 281 

fifths be added to the funds which are destined for the maintenance 
of industry, it must make a very considerable addition to the quan- 
tity of that industry, and, consequently, to the value of the annual 
produce of land and labour. 

An operation of this kind has, within these five-and-twenty or 
thirty years, been performed in Scotland, by the erection of new 
banking companies in almost every considerable town, and even 
in some country villages.'^ The effects of it have been precisely those 
above described. The business of the country is almost entirely car- 
ried on by means of the paper of those different banking companies, 
with which purchases and payments of all kinds are commonly 
made. Silver very seldom appears except in the change of a twenty 
shillings bank note, and gold still seldomer. But though the cdnduct 
of all those different companies has not been unexceptionable, and 
has accordingly required an act of parliament to regulate it; the 
country,^ notwithstanding, has evidently derived great benefit from 
their trade. I have heard it asserted, that the trade of the city of 
Glasgow, doubled in about fifteen years after the first erection of 
the banks there; and that the trade of Scotland has more than 
quadrupled since the first erection of the two public banks at Edin- 
burgh, of which the one, called The Bank of Scotland, was estab- 
lished by act of parliament in 1695; the other, called The Royal 
Bank, by royal charter in 1727.® Whether the trade, either of Scot- 
land in general, or of the city of Glasgow in particular, has really 
increased in so great a proportion, during so short a period, I do not 
pretend to know. If either of them has increased in this proportion, 
it seems to be an effect too great to be accounted for by the sole 
operation of this cause. That the trade and industry of Scotland, 
however, have increased very considerably during this period, and 
that the banks have contributed a good deal to this increase, can- 
not be doubted. 

The value of the silver money which circulated in Scotland be- 
fore the union, in 1707, and which, immediately after it, was 
brought into the bank of Scotland in order to be re-coined, amount- 
ed to 411,117/. los. gd. sterling. No account has been got of the 
gold coin; but it appears from the ancient accounts of the mint of 
Scotland, that the value of the gold annually coined somewhat ex- 
ceeded that of the silver There were a good many people too upon 
this occasion, who, from a diffidence of repayment, did not bring 

’'Below, p. 292. ® Misprinted “contrary” in ed. 5. 

"^Adam Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1695. 

See Ruddiman’s Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata, &c. Scotiae. Pp. 84, 85 
See above, p. 213, note. 


An opera- 
tion of 
this kind 
has been 
carried 
out in 
Scotland 
with ex- 
cellent 
effects. 


There was 
at the 
Union at 
least a 
million 
sterling of 
gold and 
silver 
money, 
and now 
there is 



not half a 
million. 


Notes are 
ordinarily 
issued by 
discount- 
ing bills, 


but the 
Scotch 
banks in- 
vented the 
system of 
cadi ac- 
counts, 


282 the wealth of nations 

their silver into the bank of Scotland: and there was, besides, some 
English coin, which was not called in.^^ The whole value of the gold 
and silver, therefore, which circulated in Scotland before the union, 
cannot be estimated at less than a million sterling. It seems to have 
constituted almost the whole circulation of that country; for though 
the circulation of the bank of Scotland, which had then no rival, was 
considerable, it seems to have made but a very small part of the 
whole. In the present times the whole circulation of Scotland can- 
not be estimated at less than two millions, of which that part which 
consists in gold and silver, most probably, does not amount to half 
a million. But though the circulating gold and silver of Scotland 
have suffered so great a diminution during this period, its real rich- 
es and prosperity do not appear to have suffered any. Its agricul- 
ture, manufactures, and trade, on the contrary, the annual produce 
of its land and labour, have evidently been augmented. 

It is chiefly by discounting bills of exchange, that is, by ad- 
vancing money upon them before they are due, that the greater part 
of banks and bankers issue their promissory notes. They deduct 
always, upon whatever sum they advance, the legal interest till the 
bill shall become due. The payment of the bill, when it becomes 
due, replaces to the bank the value of what had been advanced, to- 
gether with a clear profit of the interest. The banker who advances 
to the merchant whose bill he discounts, not gold and silver, but his 
own promissory notes, has the advantage of being able to discount 
to a greater amount by the whole value of his promissory notes, 
which he finds by experience, are commonly in circulation. He is 
thereby enabled to make his clear gain of interest on so much a 
larger sum. 

The commerce of Scotland, which at present is not very great, 
was still more inconsiderable when the two first banking companies 
were established; and those companies would have had but little 
trade, had they confined their business to the discounting of bills of 
exchange. They invented, therefore, another method of issuing their 
promissory notes; by granting, what they called, cash accounts, 
that is by giving credit to the extent of a certain sum (two or three 
thousand pounds, for example), to any individual who could pro- 
cure two persons of undoubted credit and good landed estate to 
become surety for him, that whatever money should be advanced 
to him, within the sum for which the credit had been given, should 

“The folly of a few misers or the fear that people might have of losing 
their money, or various other dangers and accidents, prevented very many of 
the old Scots coins from being brought in,” op. cit., p. 175. Ruddiman in a 
note, op. cit., p. 231, says: “The English coin was also ordained to be called 
in,” but does not include it in his estimate of not less than £900,000, p. 176. 



MONEY 283 

be repaid upon demand, together with the legal interest. Credits of 
this kind are, I believe, commonly granted by banks and bankers 
in all different parts of the world. But the easy terms upon which 
the Scotch banking companies accept of re-pa5mient are, so far as I 
know, peculiar to them, and have, perhaps, been the principal 
cause, both of the great trade of those companies, and of the bene- 
fit which the country has received from it. 

Whoever has a credit of this kind with one of those companies, 
and borrows a thousand pounds upon it, for example, may repay 
this sum piece-meal, by twenty and thirty pounds at a time, the 
company discounting a proportionable part of the interest of the 
great sum from the day on which each of those small sums is paid 
in, till the whole be in this manner repaid. All merchants, therefore, 
and almost all men of business, find it convenient to keep such 
cash accounts with them, and are thereby interested to promote the 
trade of those companies, by readily receiving their notes in all 
payments, and by encouraging all those with whom they have any 
influence to do the same. The banks, when their customers apply 
to them for money, generally advance it to them in their own 
promissory notes. These the merchants pay away to the manufac- 
turers for goods, the manufacturers to the farmers for materials and 
provisions, the farmers to their landlords for rent, the landlords 
repay them to the merchants for the conveniencies and luxuries 
with which they supply them, and the merchants again return them 
to the banks in order to balance their cash accounts, or to replace 
what they may have borrowed of them; and thus almost the whole 
money business of the country is transacted by means of them. 
Hence the great trade of those companies. 

By means of those cash accounts every merchant can, without 
imprudence, carry on a greater trade than he otherwise could do. 
If there are two merchants, one in London, and the other in Edin- 
burgh, who employ equal stocks in the same branch of trade, the 
Edinburgh merchant can, without imprudence, carry on a greater 
trade, and give employment to a greater number of people than the 
London merchant. The London merchant must always keep by him 
a considerable sum of money, either in his own coffers, or in those 
of his banker, who gives him no interest for it, in order to answer 
the demands continually coming upon him for payment of the goods 
which he purchases upon credit. Let the ordinary amount of this 
sum be supposed five hundred pounds. The value of the goods in 
his warehouse must always be less by five hundred pounds than it 
would have been, had he not been obliged to keep such a sum unem- 
ployed. Let us suppose that he generally disposes of his whole stock 


which en- 
able them 
to issue 
notes 
readily, 


and make 
it posable 
for every 
merchant 
to carry 
on a 
greater 
trade than 
he other- 
wise 
could. 



The 
Scotch 
banks 
can of 
course 
discount 
bills when 
required. 

The whole 
of the 
paper 
money 
can never 
exceed 
the gold 
and silver 
which 
would 
have been 
required 
in its ab- 
sence. 


284 the wealth of nations 

upon hand, or of goods to the value of his whole stock upon hand, 
once in the year. By being obliged to keep so great a sum unem- 
ployed, he must sell in a year five hundred pounds worth less goods 
than he might otherwise have done. His annual profits must be less 
by all that he could have made by the sale of five hundred pounds 
worth more goods; and the number of people employed in prepar- 
ing his goods for the market, must be less by all those that five 
hundred pounds more stock could have employed. The merchant in 
Edinburgh, on the other hand, keeps no money unemployed for 
answering such occasional demands. When they actually come upon 
him, h^ satisfies them from his cash account with the bank, and 
gradually replaces the sum borrowed with the money or paper 
which comes in from the occasional sales of his goods. With the 
same stock, therefore, he can, without imprudence, have at all times 
in his warehouse a larger quantity of goods than the London mer- 
chant; and can thereby both make a greater profit himself, and 
give constant employment to a greater number of Industrious peo- 
ple who prepare those goods for the market. Hence the great benefit 
which the country has derived from this trade. 

The facility of discounting bills of exchange, it may be thought 
indeed, gives the English merchants a conveniency equivalent to 
the cash accounts of the Scotch merchants. But die Scotch mer- 
chants, it must be remembered, can discount their bills of exchange 
as easily as the English merchants; and have, besides, the addi- 
tional conveniency of their cash accounts. 

The whole paper money of every kind which can easily circulate 
in any country never can exceed the value of the gold and silver, of 
which it supplies the place, or which (the commerce being sup- 
posed the same) would circulate there, if there was no paper money. 
If twenty shilling notes, for example, are the lowest paper money 
current in Scotland, the whole of that currency which can easily 
circulate there cannot exceed the sum of gold and silver which 
would be necessary for transacting the annual exchanges of twenty 
shillings value and upwards usually transacted within that coun- 
try. Should the circulating paper at any time exceed that sum, as 
the excess could neither be sent abroad nor be employed in the cir- 
culation of the country, it must immediately return upon the banks 
to be exchanged for gold and silver. Many people would immediate- 
ly perceive that they had more of this paper than was necessary 
for transacting their business at home, and as they could not send it 
abroad, they would immediately demand payment of it from the 
banks. When this superfluous paper was converted into gold and 
silver, they could easily find a use for it by sending it abroad; but 



MONEY 285 

they could find none while it remained in the shape of paper. There 
would immediately, therefore, be a run upon the banks to the 
whole extent of this superfluous paper, and, if they shewed any 
difficulty or backwardness in payment, to a much greater extent; 
the alarm, which this would occasion, necessarily increasing the run. 

Over and above the expences which are common to every branch 
of trade ; such as the expence of house-rent, the wages of servants, 
clerks, accountants, &c.; the expences peculiar to a bank consist 
chiefly in two articles: First, in the expence of keeping at all times 
in its coffers, for answering the occasional demands of the holders 
of its notes, a large sum of money, of which it loses the interest: 
And, secondly, in the expence of replenishing those coffers as fast 
as they are emptied by answering such occasional demands. 

A banking company, which issues more paper than can be em- 
ployed in the circulation of the country, and of which the excess is 
continually returning upon them for payment, ought to increase 
the quantity of gold and silver, which they keep at all times in 
their coffers, not only in proportion to this excessive increase of 
their circulation, but in a much greater proportion; their notes re- 
turning upon them much faster than in proportion to the excess of 
their quantity. Such a company, therefore, ought to increase the 
first article of their expence, not only in proportion to this forced 
increase of their business, but in a much greater proportion. 

The coffers of such a company too, though they ought to be 
filled much fuller, yet must empty themselves much faster than if 
their business was confined within more reasonable bounds, and 
must require, not only a more violent, but a more constant and un- 
interrupted exertion of expence in order to replenish them. The coin 
too, which is thus continually drawn in such large quantities from 
their coffers, cannot be employed in the circulation of the country. 
It comes in place of a paper which is over and above what can be 
employed in that circulation, and is therefore over and above what 
can be employed in it too. But as that coin will not be allowed to 
lie idle, it must, in one shape or another, be sent abroad, in order to 
find that profitable employment which it cannot find at home; and 
this continual exportation of gold and silver, by enhancing the dif- 
ficulty, must necessarily enhance still further the expence of the 
bank, in finding new gold and silver in order to replenish those 
coffers, which empty themselves so very rapidly. Such a company, 
therefore, must, in proportion to this forced increase of their busi- 
ness, increase the second article of their expence still more than the 
first. 

Let us suppose that all the paper of a particular bank, which the 


The pecu- 
liar ex- 
penses of 
a bank are 
(i) the 
keeping 
and (2) 
the re- 
plenishing 
of a stock 
of money 
with 
which to 
repay 
notes. 

A bank 
which 
issues too 
much pa- 
per will 
much in- 
crease 
both the 
first 

and the 
second ex- 
pense, 



as may be 
shown by 
an ex- 
ample. 


Banks 

have 

sometimes 
not un- 
derstood 
this, 


eg., the 
Bank of 
England, 


and the 
Scotch 
banks. 


286 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

circulation of the country can easily absorb and employ, amounts 
exactly to forty thousand pounds; and that for answering occa- 
sional demands, this bank is obliged to keep at all times in its cof- 
fers ten thousand pounds in gold and silver. Should this bank at- 
tempt to circulate forty-four thousand pounds, the four thousand 
pounds which are over and above what the circulation can easily 
absorb and employ, will return upon it almost as fast as they are 
issued. For answering occasional demands, therefore, this bank 
ought to keep at all times in its coffers, not ten thousand pounds 
only, but fourteen thousand pounds. It will thus gain nothing by the 
interest of the four thousand pounds excessive circulation; and it 
will lose the whole expence of continually collecting four thousand 
pounds in gold and silver, which will be continually going out of its 
coffers as fast as they are brought into them. 

Had every particular banking company always understood and 
attended to its own particular interest, the circulation never could 
have been overstocked with paper money. But every particular 
banking company has not always understood or attended to its own 
particular interest, and the circulation has frequently been over- 
stocked with paper money. 

By issuing too great a quantity of paper, of which the excess was 
continually returning, in order to be exchanged for gold and silver, 
the bank of England was for many years together obliged to coin 
gold to the extent of between eight hundred thousand pounds and a 
million a year; or at an average, about eight hundred and fifty 
thousand pounds.^^ For this great coinage the bank (in conse- 
quence of the worn and degraded state into which the gold coin had 
fallen a few years ago) was frequently obliged to purchase gold bul- 
lion at the high price of four pounds an ounce, which it soon after 
issued in coin at 3/. i^s. io| d. an ounce, losing in this manner be- 
tween two and a half and three per cent, upon the coinage of so very 
large a sum. Though the bank therefore paid no seignorage, though 
the government was properly at the expence of the coinage, this 
liberality of government did not prevent altogether the expence of 
the bank. 

The Scotch banks, in consequence of an excess of the same kind, 
were all obliged to employ constantly agents at London to collect 
money for them, at an expence which was seldom below one and a 

^From 1766 to 1772 inclusive the coinage averaged about £810,000 per an- 
num. The amount for “ten years together” is stated below, pp 516, 521, 
to have been upwards of £800,000 a year, though the average for the ten 
years 1763-1772 was only £760,000. But the inclusion of the large coinage of 
i 773 > ^^22, £1,317,645, would raise these averages considerably. See the figures 
at the end of each year in Macpherson, Anmls of Commerce. 



MONEY 287 

half or two per cent. This money was sent down by the waggon, and 
insured by the carriers at an additional expence of three quarters 
per cent, or fifteen shillings on the hundred pounds. Those agents 
were not always able to replenish the coffers of their employers so 
fast as they were emptied. In this case the resource of the banks 
was, to draw upon their correspondents in London bills of exchange 
to the extent of the sum which they wanted. When those corres- 
pondents afterwards drew upon them for the payment of this sum, 
together with the interest and a commission, some of those banks, 
from the distress into which their excessive circulation had thrown 
them, had sometimes no other means of satisfying this draught but 
by drawing a second set of bills either upon the same, or upon some 
other correspondents in London; and the same sum, or rather bills 
for the same sum, would in this manner make sometimes more than 
two or three journies: the debtor bank, paying always the interest 
and commission upon the whole accumulated sum. Even those 
Scotch banks which never distinguished themselves by their ex- 
treme imprudence, were sometimes obliged to employ this ruinous 
resource. 

The gold coin which was paid out either by the bank of England, 
or by the Scotch banks, in exchange for that part of their paper 
which was over and above what could be employed in the circula- 
tion of the country, being likewise over and above what could be 
employed in that circulation, was sometimes sent abroad in the 
shape of coin, sometimes melted down and sent abroad in the shape 
of bullion, and sometimes melted down and sold to the bank of 
England at the high price of four pounds an ounce. It was the new- 
est, the heaviest, and the best pieces only which were carefully 
picked out of the whole coin, and either sent abroad or melted 
down. At home, and while they remained in the shape of coin, 
those heavy pieces were of no more value than the light: But they 
were of more value abroad, or when melted down into bullion, at 
home. The bank of England, notwithstanding their great annual 
coinage, found to their astonishment, that there was every year the 
same scarcity of coin as there had been the year before; and that 
notwithstanding the great quantity of good and new coin which was 
every year issued from the bank, the state of the coin, instead of 
growing better and better, became every year worse and worse. 
Every year they found themselves under the necessity of coining 
nearly the same quantity of gold as they had coined the year be- 
fore, and from the continual rise in the price of gold bullion, in con- 
sequence of the continual wearing and clipping of the coin, the ex- 

“ Misprinted “remain” in ed. 5. 



The exces- 
sive circu- 
lation was 
caused by 
overtrad- 
ing. 

A bank 
ought not 
to ad- 
vance 
more than 
the 

amount 
which 
merchants 
would 
otherwise 
have to 
keep by 
them in 
cash. 

This limit 
is ob- 
served 
when only 
real bills 
of ex- 
change 
are dis- 
counted. 


Cash ac- 
counts 
should be 


288 the wealth oe nations 

pence of this great annual coinage became every year greater and 
greater. The bank of England, it is to be observed, by supplying its 
own coffers with coin, is indirectly obliged to supply the whole king- 
dom, into which coin is continually flowing from those coffers in a 
great variety of ways. Whatever coin therefore was wanted to sup- 
port this excessive circulation both of Scotch and English papei 
money, whatever vacuities this excessive circulation occasioned in 
the necessary coin of the kingdom, the bank o£ England was 
obliged to supply them. The Scotch banks, no doubt, paid all of 
them very dearly for their own imprudence and inattention. But the 
bank of England paid very dearly, not only for its own imprud- 
ence, but for the much greater imprudence of almost all the Scotch 
banks. 

The over-trading of some bold projectors in both parts of the 
united kingdom, was the original cause of this excessive circulation 
of paper money. 

What a bank can with propriety advance to a merchant or un- 
dertaker of any kind, is not either the whole capital with which he 
trades, or even any considerable part of that capital; but that part 
of it only, which he would otherwise be obliged to keep by him un- 
employed, and in ready money for answering occasional demands. 
If the paper money which the bank advances never exceeds this 
value, it can never exceed the value of the gold and silver, which 
would necessarily circulate in the country if there was no paper 
money; it can never exceed the quantity which the circulation of 
the country can easily absorb and employ. 

When a bank discounts to a merchant a real bill of exchange 
drawn by a real creditor upon a real debtor, and which, as soon as it 
becomes due, is really paid by that debtor; it only advances to him 
a part of the value which he would otherwise be obliged to keep by 
him unemployed and in ready money for answering occasional de- 
mands. The payment of the bill, when it becomes due, replaces to 
the bank the value of what it had advanced, together with the in- 
terest. The coffers of the bank, so far as its dealings are confined to 
such customers, resemble a water pond, from which, though a 
stream is continually running out, yet another is continually run- 
ning in, fully equal to that which runs out; so that, without any 
further care or attention, the pond keeps always equally, or very 
near equally full. Little or no expence can ever be necessary for re- 
plenishing the coffers of such a bank. 

A merchant, without over-trading, may frequently have occa- 
sion for a sum of ready money, even when he has no bills to dis- 
count. When a bank, besides discounting his bills, advances him 



MONEY 


2S9 

likewise upon such occasions, such sums upon his cash account, and carefully 
accepts of a piece meal repa)mient as the money comes in from the 
occasional sale of his goods, upon the easy terms of the banking the same 
companies of Scotland; it dispenses him entirely from the necessity ®^^d, 
of keeping any part of his stock by him unemployed and in ready 
money for answering occasional demands. When such demands 
actually come upon him, he can answer them sufficiently from his 
cash account. The bank, however, in dealing with such customers, 
ought to observe with great attention, whether in the course of 
some short period (of four, five, six, or eight months, for example) 
the sum of the repayments which it commonly receives from them, 
is, or is not, fully equal to that of the advances which it commonly 
makes to them. If, within the course of such short periods, the sum 
of the repayments from certain customers is, upon most occasions, 
fully equal to that of the advances, it may safely continue to deal 
with such customers. Though the stream which is in this case con- 
tinually running out from its coffers may be very large, that which 
is continually running into them must be at least equally large; so 
that without any further care or attention those coffers are likely to 
be always equally or very near equally full; and scarce ever to re- 
quire any extraordinary expence to replenish them. If, on the con- 
trary, the sum of the repayments from certain other customers falls 
commonly very much short of the advances which it makes to them, 
it cannot with any safety continue to deal with such customers, at 
least if they continue to deal with it in this manner. The stream 
which is in this case continually running out from its coffers is 
necessarily much larger than that which is continually running in; 
so that, unless they are replenished by some great and continual 
effort of expence, those coffers must soon be exhausted altogether. 

The banking companies of Scotland, accordingly, were for a long as they 
time very careful to require frequent and regular repayments from 
all their customers, and did not care to deal with any person, what- time by 
ever might be his fortune or credit, who did not make, what they 
called, frequent and regular operations with them. By this atten- Xch re- 
tion, besides saving almost entirely the extraordinary expence of re- quired 
plenishing their coffers, they gained two other very considerable 
advantages. lar opera- 

First, by this attention they were enabled to make some toler- tions, 
able judgment concerning the thriving or declining circumstances 
of their debtors, without being obliged to look out for any other 
evidence besides what their own books afforded them; men being able to 
for the most part either regular or irregular in their repa^ents, judge of 

according as their circumstances are either thriving or declining. A ^ ® 



turn- 
stances of 
their 
debtors, 


and (2) 
were se- 
cured 
against 
issuing 
too much 
paper. 


290 THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

private man who lends out his money to perhaps half a dozen or a 
dozen of debtors, may, either by himself or his agents, observe and 
enquire both constantly and carefully into the conduct and situa- 
tion of each of them. But a banking company, which lends money 
to perhaps five hundred different people, and of which the atten- 
tion is continually occupied by objects of a very different kind, can 
have no regular information concerning the conduct and circum- 
stances of the greater part of its debtors beyond what its own books 
afford it.^^ In requiring frequent and regular repayments from all 
their customers, the banking companies of Scotland had probably 
this advantage in view. 

Secondly, by this attention they secured themselves from the 
possibility of issuing more paper money than what the circulation 
of the country could easily absorb and employ. When they ob- 
served, that within moderate periods of time the repayments of a 
particular customer were upon most occasions fully equal to the 
advances which they had made to him, they might be assured that 
the paper money which they had advanced to him, had not at any 
time exceeded the quantity of gold and silver which he would other- 
wise have been obliged to keep by him for answering occasional de- 
mands; and that, consequently, the paper money, which they hacP 
circulated by his means, had not at any time exceeded the quantity' 
of gold and silver which would have circulated in the country, had 
there been no paper money. The frequency, regularity and amounts 
of his repayments would sufficiently demonstrate that the amount 
of their advances had at no time exceeded that part of his capital 
which he would otherwise have been obliged to keep by him unem- 
ployed and in ready money for answering occasional demands; that 
is, for the purpose of keeping the rest of his capital in constant em- 
ployment. It is this part of his capital only which, within moderate 
periods of time, is continually returning to every dealer in the shape 
of money, whether paper or coin, and continually going from him 
in the same shape. If the advances of the bank had commonly ex- 
ceeded this part of his capital, the ordinary amount of his repay- 
ments could not, within moderate periods of time, have equalled the 
ordinary amount of its advances. The stream which, by means of 
his dealings, was continually running into the coffers of the bank, 
could not have been equal to the stream which, by means of the 
same dealings, was continually running out. The advances of the 
bank paper, by exceeding the quantity of gold and silver which, had 

^^But as Playfair (ed. of Wealth of Nations, vol. i., p. 472) points out, the 
more customers a bank has the more it is likely to know the transactions of 
each of them 



MONEY 291 

there been no such advances, he would have been obliged to keep 
by him for answering occasional demands, might soon come to ex- 
ceed the whole quantity of gold and silver which (the commerce 
being supposed the same) would have circulated in the country had 
there been no paper money; and consequently to exceed the quan- 
tity which the circulation of the country could easily absorb and 
employ; and the excess of this paper money would immediately 
have returned upon the bank in order to be exchanged for gold and 
silver. This second advantage, though equally red, was not per- 
haps so well understood by all the different banking companies of 
Scotland as the first. 

When, partly by the conveniency of discounting bills, and partly 
by that of cash accounts, the creditable traders of any country can 
be dispensed from the necessity of keeping any part of their stock 
by them unemployed and in ready money for answering occasional 
demands, they can reasonably expect no farther assistance from 
banks and bankers, who, when they have gone thus far, cannot, 
consistently with their own interest and safety, go farther. A bank 
cannot, consistently with its own interest, advance to a trader the 
whole or even the greater part of the circulating capital with which 
he trades; because, though that capital is continudly returning to 
him in the shape of money, and going from him in the same shape, 
yet the whole of the returns is too distant from the whole of the out- 
goings, and the sum of his repa3mients could not equal the sum of 
its advances within such moderate periods of time as suit the con- 
veniency of a bank. Still less could a bank afford to advance him 
any considerable part of his fixed capital; of the capital which the 
undertaker of an iron forge, for example, employs in erecting his 
forge and smelting-house, his work-houses and warehouses, the 
dwelling-houses of his workmen, &c.; of the capital which the un- 
dertaker of a mine employs in sinking his shafts, in erecting en- 
gines for drawing out the water, in making roads and waggon-ways, 
&c.; of the capital which the person who undertakes to improve 
land employs in clearing, draining, enclosing, manuring and plough- 
ing waste and uncultivated fields, in building farm-houses, with all 
their necessary appendages of stables, granaries, &c. The returns of 
the fixed capital are in almost all cases much slower than those of 
the circulating capital; and such expences, even when laid out with 
the greatest prudence and judgment, very seldom return to the un- 
dertaker till after a period of many years, a period by far too dis- 
tant to suit the conveniency of a bank. Traders and other under- 
takers may, no doubt, with great propriety, carry on a very consid- 
erable part of their projects with borrowed money. In justice to 


Bankers’ 
loans 
ought to 
be only 
for mode- 
rate peri- 
ods of 
time. 



More 
than 
twenty- 
five years 
ago the 
proper 
amount of 
paper 
money 
had been 
reached 
in Scot- 
land, 

but the 
traders 
were not 
content, 


292 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

their creditors, however, their own capital ought, in this case, to be 
sufficient to ensure, if I may say so, the capital of those creditors; 
or to render it extremely improbable that those creditors should in- 
cur any loss, even though the success of the project should fall very 
much short of the expectation of the projectors. Even with this pre- 
caution too, the money which is borrowed, and which it is meant 
should not be repaid till after a period of several years, ought not 
to be borrowed of a bank, but ought to be borrowed upon bond or 
mortgage, of such private people as propose to live upon the inter- 
est of their money, without taking the trouble themselves to em- 
ploy the capital; and who are upon that account willing to lend that 
capital to such people of good credit as are likely to keep it for sev- 
eral years. A bank, indeed, which lends its money without the ex- 
pence of stampt paper, or of attornies fees for drawing bonds and 
mortgages, and which accepts of repayment upon the easy terms of 
the banking companies of Scotland; would, no doubt, be a very 
convenient creditor to such traders and undertakers. But such trad- 
ers and undertakers would, surely, be most inconvenient debtors to 
such a bank. 

It is now more than five-and-twenty years since the paper money 
issued by the different banking companies of Scotland was fully 
equal, or rather was somewhat more than fully equal, to what the 
circulation of the country could easily absorb and employ.^® Those 
companies, therefore, had so long ago given all the assistance to the 
traders and other undertakers of Scotland which it is possible for 
banks and bankers, consistently with their own interest, to give. 
They had even done somewhat more. They had over-traded a little, 
and had brought upon themselves that loss, or at least that diminu- 
tion of profit, which in this particular business never fails to attend 
the smallest degree of over-trading. Those traders and other under- 
takers, having got so much assistance from banks and bankers, 
wished to get still more. The banks, they seem to have thought, 
could extend their credits to whatever sum might be wanted, with- 
out incurring any other expence besides that of a few reams of 
paper. They complained of the contracted views and dastardly 
spirit of the directors of those banks, which did not, they said, ex 
tend their credits in proportion to the extension of the trade of the 
country; meaning, no doubt, by the extension of that trade the ex- 
tension of their own projects beyond what they could carry on, 
either with their own capital, or with what they had credit to bor- 
row of private people m the usual way of bond or mortgage. The 
banks, they seem to have thought, were in honour bound to supply 

“Above, p. 281. 



MONEY 293 

the deficiency, and to provide them with all the capital which they 
wanted to trade with. The banks, however, were of a different opin- 
ion, and upon their refusing to extend their credits, some of those 
traders had recourse to an expedient which, for a time, served their 
purpose, though at a much greater expence, yet as effectually as the 
utmost extension of bank credits could have done. This expedient 
was no other than the well-known shift of drawing and re-drawing ; 
the shift to which unfortunate traders have sometimes recourse 
when they are upon the brink of bankruptcy. The practice of rais- 
ing money in this manner had been long known in England, and 
during the course of the late war, when the high profits of trade 
afforded a great temptation to over-trading, is said to have been 
carried on to a very great extent. From England it was brought into 
Scotland, where, in proportion to the very limited commerce, and 
to the very moderate capital of the country, it was soon carried on 
to a much greater extent than it ever had been in England. 

The practice of drawing and re-drawing is so well known to all 
men of business, that it may perhaps be thought unnecessary to 
give any account of it. But as this book may come into the hands of 
many people who are not men of business, and as the effects of this 
practice upon the banking trade are not perhaps generally under- 
stood even by men of business themselves, I shall endeavour to ex- 
plain it as distinctly as I can. 

The customs of merchants, which were established when the bar- 
barous laws of Europe did not enforce the performance of their con- 
tracts, and which during the course of the two last centuries have 
been adopted into the laws of all European nations, have given such 
extraordinary privileges to bills of exchange, that money is more 
readily advanced upon them, than upon any other species of obli- 
gation; especially when they are made payable within so short a 
period as two or three months after their date. If, when the bill be- 
comes due, the acceptor does not pay it as soon as it is presented, he 
becomes from that moment a bankrupt. The bill is protested, and 
returns upon the drawer, who, if he does not immediately pay it, 
becomes likewise a bankrupt. If, before it came to the person who 
presents it to the acceptor for payment, it had passed through the 
hands of several other persons, who had successively advanced to 
one another the contents of it either in money or goods, and who to 
express that each of them had in his turn received those contents, 
had all of them in their order endorsed, that is, written their names 
upon the back of the bill; each endorser becomes in his turn liable 
to the owner of the bill for those contents, and, if he fails to pay, he 
becomes too from that moment a bankrupt. Though the drawer, 


and some 
of them 
resorted 
to draw- 
ing and 
redraw- 
ing, 


which 
shall be 
explained 


Bills of 
exchange 
have ex- 
traordi- 
nary legal 
privileges. 



So two 
persons, 
one in 
London 
and one 
in Edin- 
burgh, 
would 
draw bills 
on each 
other. 


Much 

money 

was 

raised in 
this ex- 
pensive 
way. 


294 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

acceptor, and endorsers of the bill should, all of them, be persons of 
doubtful credit; yet still the shortness of the date gives some secur- 
ity to the owner of the bill Though all of them may be very likely 
to become bankrupts; it is a chance if they all become so in so short 
a time. The house is cra2y, says a weary traveller to himself, and 
will not stand very long; but it is a chance if it falls to-night, and I 
will venture, therefore, to sleep in it to-night. 

The trader A in Edinburgh, we shall suppose, draws a bill upon 
B in London, payable two months after date. In reality B in Lon- 
don owes nothing to A in Edinburgh; but he agrees to accept of 
A’s bill, upon condition that before the term of payment he shall 
redraw upon A in Edinburgh for the same sum, together with the 
interest and a commission, another bill payable likewise two months 
after date. B accordingly, before the expiration of the first two 
months, re-draws this bill upon A in Edinburgh; who again, before 
the expiration of the second two months, draws a second bill upon 
B in London, payable likewise two months after date; and before 
the expiration of the third two months, B in London re-draws upon 
A in Edinburgh another bill, payable also two months after date. 
This practice has sometimes gone on, not only for several months, 
but for several years together, the bill always returning upon A in 
Edinburgh, with the accumulated interest and commission of all 
the former bills. The interest was five per cent, in the year, and the 
commission was never less than one half per cent, on each draught. 
This commission being repeated more than six times in the year, 
whatever money A might raise by this expedient must necessarily 
have cost him something more than eight per cent, in the year, and 
sometimes a great deal more; when either the price of the commis- 
sion happened to rise, or when he was obliged to pay compound in- 
terest upon the interest and commission of former bills. This prac- 
tice was called raising money by circulation. 

In a country where the ordinary profits of stock in the greater 
part of mercantile projects are supposed to run between six and ten 
per cent., it must have been a very fortunate speculation of which 
the returns could not only repay the enormous expence at which the 
money was thus borrowed for carrying it on; but afford, besides, a 
good surplus profit to the projector. Many vast and extensive pro- 
jects, however, were undertaken, and for several years carried on 
without any other fund to support them besides what was raised at 
this enormous expence. The projectors, no doubt, had in their gold- 
en dreams the most distinct vision of this great profit. Upon their 
awaking, however, either at the end of their projects, or when they 



MONEY =95 

were no longer able to carry them on, they very seldom, I believe, 
had the good fortune to find it.^® 

The bills which A in Edinburgh drew upon B in London, he reg- The bill 
ularly discounted two months before they were due with some bank 
or banker in Edinburgh; and the bills which B in London redrew would be 
upon A in Edinburgh, he as regularly discounted either with the disrount- 
bank of England, or with some other bankers in London. Whatever 
was advanced upon such circulating bills, was, in Edinburgh, ad- burgh, 
vanced in the paper of the Scotch banks, and in London, when they 
were discounted at the bank of England, in the paper of that bank. Edin- 

Though the bills upon which this paper had been advanced, were all hurgb 

of them re-paid in their turn as soon as they became due; yet the 
value which had been really advanced upon the first bill, was never London, 
really returned to the banks which advanced it; because, before 

each bill became due, another bill was always drawn to somewhat a and each 

was al- 

The method described in the text was by no means either the most com- 
mon or the most expensive one in which those adventurers sometimes raised 
money by circulation. It frequently happened that A in Edinburgh would en- 
able B in London to pay the first bill of exchange by drawing, a few days 
before it became due, a second bill at three months date upon the same B in 
London. This bill, being payable to his own order, A sold in Edinburgh at 
par ; and with its contents purchased bills upon London payable at sight to 
the order of B, to whom he sent them by the post. Towards the end of the 
late war, the exchange between Edinburg and London was frequently three 
per cent, against Edinburgh, and those bfils at sight must frequently have cost 
A that premium. This transaction therefore being repeated at least four times 
in the year, and being loaded with a commission of at least one half per cent, 
upon each repetition, must at that period have cost A at least fourteen per 
cent, in the year. At other times A would enable B to discharge the first biU 
of exchange by drawing, a few days before it became due, a second bill at two 
months date; not upon B, but upon some third person, C, for example, in 
London. This other bill was made payable to the order of B, who, upon its 
being accepted by C, discounted it with some banker in London; and A en- 
abled C to discharge it by drawing, a few days before it became due, a third 
bill, likewise at two months date, sometimes upon his first correspondent B, 
and sometimes upon some fourth or fifth person, D or E, for example. This 
third bill was made payable to the order of C ; who, as soon as it was ac- 
cepted, discounted it in the same manner with some banker in London. Such 
operations being repeated at least six times in the year, and being loaded with 
a commission of at least one-half per cent, upon each repetition, together with 
the legal interest of five per cent., this method of raising money, in the same 
manner as that described in the text, must have cost A something more than 
eight per cent. By saving, however, the exchange between Edinburgh and 
London it was less expensive than that mentioned in the foregoing part of 
this note; but then it required an established credit with more houses than one 
in London, an advantage which many of these adventurers could not always 
find it easy to procure. This note appears first in ed. 2. Playfair observes that 
the calculation of the loss of 14 per cent, by the first method is wrong, since 
“if A at Edinburgh negotiated his bills on London at 3 per cent, loss, he would 
gain as much in purchasing biUs on London with the money.” — Ed. of Wsaltk 
of Nations, vol. i., p. 483, note. 



ways re- 
placed by 
another. 


The 
amount 
thus ad- 
vanced by 
the banks 
was in ex- 
cess of the 
limit laid 
down 
above, 
but this 
was not 
perceived 
at first. 


When the 
banks 
found it 
out they 
made dif- 
ficulties 
about dis- 
counting, 


296 XHE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

greater amount than the bill which was soon to be paid ; and the dis- 
counting of this other bill was essentially necessary towards the 
payment of that which was soon to be due. This payment, there- 
fore, was altogether fictitious. The stream, which, by means of those 
circulating bills of exchange, had once been made to run out from 
the coffers of the banks, was never replaced by any stream which 
really run into them. 

The paper which was issued upon those circulating bills of ex- 
change, amounted, upon many occasions, to the whole fund des- 
tined for carrying on some vast and extensive project of agriculture, 
commerce, or manufactures; and not merely to that part of it which, 
had there been no paper money, the projector would have been 
obliged to keep by him, unemployed and in ready money for an- 
swering occasional demands. The greater part of this paper was, 
consequently, over and above the value of the gold and silver which 
would have circulated in the country, had there been no paper 
money. It was over and above, therefore, what the circulation of 
the country could easily absorb and employ, and upon that account 
immediately returned upon the banks in order to be exchanged for 
gold and silver, which they were to find as they could. It was a cap- 
ital which those projectors had very artfully contrived to draw from 
those banks, not only without their knowledge or deliberate con- 
sent, but for some time, perhaps, without their having the most dis- 
tant suspicion that they had really advanced it. 

When two people, who are continually drawing and re-drawing 
upon one another, discount their bills always with the same banker, 
he must immediately discover what they are about, and see clearly 
that they are trading, not with any capital of their own, but with 
the capital which he advances to them. But this discovery is not 
altogether so easy when they discount their bills sometimes with 
one banker, and sometimes with another, and when the same two 
persons do not constantly draw and re-draw upon one another, but 
occasionally run the round of a great circle of projectors, who find 
it for their interest to assist one another in this method of raising 
money, and to render it, upon that account, as difficult as possible 
to distinguish between a real and a fictitious bill of exchange; be- 
tween a bill drawn by a real creditor upon a real debtor, and a bill 
for which there was properly no real creditor but the bank which 
discounted it; nor any real debtor but the projector who made use 
of the money. When a banker had even made this discovery, he 
might sometimes make it too late, and might find that he had al- 
ready discounted the bills of those projectors to so great an extent, 
that, by refusing to discount any more, he would necessarily make 



MONEY 297 

them all bankrupts, and thus, by ruining them, might perhaps ruin 
himself. For his own interest and safety, therefore, he might find it 
necessary, in this very perilous situation, to go on for some time, 
endeavouring, however, to withdraw gradually, and upon that ac- 
count making every day greater and greater difficulties about dis- 
counting, in order to force those projectors by degrees to have re- 
course, either to other bankers, or to other methods of raising 
money; so as that he himself might, as soon as possible, get out of 
the circle. The difficulties, accordingly, which the bank of England, 
which the principal bankers in London, and which even the more 
prudent Scotch banks began, after a certain time, and when all of 
them had already gone too far, to make about discounting, not only 
alarmed, but enraged in the highest degree those projectors. Their 
own distress, of which this prudent and necessary reserve of the 
banks was, no doubt, the immediate occasion, they called the dis- 
tress of the country; and this distress of the country, they said, was 
altogether owing to the ignorance, pusillanimity, and bad conduct 
of the banks, which did not give a sufficiently liberal aid to the 
spiritual undertakings of those who exerted themselves in order to 
beautify, improve, and enrich the country. It was the duty of the 
banks, they seemed to think, to lend for as long a time, and to as 
great an extent as they might wish to borrow. The banks, however, 
by refusing in this manner to give more credit to those, to whom 
they had already given a great deal too much, took the only method 
by which it was now possible to save either their own credit, or the 
public credit of the country. 

In the midst of this clamour and distress, a new bank was 
established in Scotland for the express purpose of relieving the dis- 

The index s.v. Bank gives the name, “the Ayr bank ” Its head office was 
at Ayr, but it had branches at Edinburgh and Dumfries. A detailed history of 
it is to be found in The Precipitation and Fall of Messrs. Douglas, Heron and 
Company, late Bankers in Air with the Cateses of their Distress and Ruin in- 
vestigated and considered by a Committee of Inquiry appointed by the Pro- 
prietors, Edinburgh, 1778. From this it appears that Smith’s account of the 
proceedings of the bank is extremely accurate, a fact which is doubtless due to 
his old pupil, the Duke of Buccleuch, having been one of the principal share- 
holders. Writing to Pulteney on 5th September, 1772, Smith says, “though I 
have had no concern myself in die public calamities, some of the friends in 
whom I interest myself the most have been deeply concerned in them ; and 
my attention has been a good deal occupied about the most proper method 
of extricating them.” The extrication was effected chiefly by the sale of re- 
deemable annuities. See Rae, Life of Adam Smith, 1895, pp. 253-255; David 
Macpherson, Annals of Commerce, vol. iii., pp. 52S) 5535 House of Commons^ 
Journals, vol. xxxiv., pp. 493-495) and the Act of Parliament, 14 Geo. III., c. 
21. The East India Company opposed the bill on the ground that the bonds 
to be issued would compete with theirs, but thdr opposition was defeated by 
a vote of 176 to 36 in the House of Commons, Journals, vol. xxxiv., p. 601. 


which 
alarmed 
and en- 
raged the 
project- 
ors; 


then the 
Ayr bank 



was estab- 
lished and 
advanced 
money 
very 
freely, 


but soon 
got into 
difficul- 
ties, 


298 XHE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

tress of the country. The design was generous; but the execution 
was imprudent, and the nature and causes of the distress which it 
meant to relieve, were not, perhaps, well understood. This bank 
was more liberal than any other had ever been, both in granting 
cash accounts, and in discounting bills of exchange. With regard to 
the latter, it seems to have made scarce any distinction between 
real and circulating bills, but to have discounted all equally. It was 
the avowed principle of this bank to advance, upon any reasonable 
security, the whole capital which was to be employed in those 
improvements of which the returns are the most slow and distant, 
such as the improvements of land. To promote such improvements 
was even said to be the chief of the public spirited purposes for 
which it was instituted. By its liberality in granting cash accounts, 
and in discounting bills of exchange, it, no doubt, issued great quan- 
tities of its bank notes. But those bank notes being, the greater part 
of them, over and above what the circulation of the country could 
easily absorb and employ, returned upon it, in order to be ex- 
changed for gold and silver, as fast as they were issued. Its coffers 
were never well filled. The capital which had been subscribed to this 
bank at two different subscriptions, amounted to one hundred and 
sixty thousand pounds, of which eighty per cent, only was paid up. 
This sum ought to have been paid in at several different instal- 
ments. A great part of the proprietors, when they paid in their first 
instalment, opened a cash account with the bank; and the direct- 
ors, thinking themselves obliged to treat their own proprietors with 
the same liberality with which they treated all other men, allowed 
many of them to borrow upon this cash account what they paid in 
upon all their subsequent instalments. Such payments, therefore, 
only put into one coffer, what had the moment before been taken 
out of another. But had the coffers of this bank been filled ever so 
well, its excessive circulation must have emptied them faster than 
they could have been replenished by any other expedient but the 
ruinous one of drawing upon London, and when the bill became 
due, paying it, together with interest and commission, by another 
draught upon the same place. Its coffers having been filled so very 
ill, it is said to have been driven to this resource within a very few 
months after it began to do business. The estates of the proprietors 
of this bank were worth several millions, and by their subscription 
to the original bond or contract of the bank, were really pledged 
for answering all its engagements.^® By means of the great credit 

^ Ed. I does not contain “those.” 

“Macpherson, op. cit., p. 525, says the partners were the Dukes of Buc- 
deuch and Queensberry, the Earl of Dumfries, Mr. Douglas and many other 
gentlemen. 



MONEY 


m 

which so great a pledge necessarily gave it, it was, notwithstanding 
its too liberal conduct, enabled to carry on business for more than 
two years. When it was obliged to stop, it had in the circulation 
about two hundred thousand pounds in bank notes. In order to 
support the circulation of those notes, which were continually re- 
turning upon it as fast as they were issued, it had been constantly 
in the practice of drawing bills of exchange upon London, of which 
the number and value were continually increasing, and, when it 
stopt, amounted to upwards of six hundred thousand pounds. This 
bank, therefore, had, in little more than the course of two years, 
advanced to different people upwards of eight hundred thousand 
pounds at five per cent. Upon the two hundred thousand pounds 
which it circulated in bank notes, this five per cent, might, perhaps, 
be considered as clear gain, without any other deduction besides 
the expence of management. But upon upwards of six hundred 
thousand pounds, for which it was continually drawing bills of ex- 
change upon London, it was paying, in the way of interest and com- 
mission, upwards of eight per cent., and was consequently losing 
more than three per cent, upon more than three-fourths of all its 
dealings. 

The operations of this bank seem to have produced effects quite 
opposite to those which were intended by ihe particular persons 
who planned and directed it. They seem to have intended to sup- 
port the spirited undertakings, for as such they considered them, 
which were at that time carrying on in different parts of the coun- 
try; and at the same time, by drawing the whole banking business 
to themselves, to supplant all the other Scotch banks; particularly 
those established at Edinburgh, whose backwardness in discounting 
bills of exchange had given some offence. This bank, no doubt, gave 
some temporary relief to those projectors, and enabled them to 
carry on their projects for about two years longer than they could 
otherwise have done. But it thereby only enabled them to get so 
much deeper into debt, so that when ruin came, it fell so much the 
heavier both upon them and upon their creditors. The operations 
of this bank, therefore, instead of relieving, in reality aggravated in 
the long-run the distress which those projectors had brought both 
upon themselves and upon their country. It would have been much 
better for themselves, their creditors and their country, had the 
greater part of them been obliged to stop two years sooner than 
they actually did. The temporary relief, however, which this bank 
afforded to those projectors, proved a real and permanent relief to 
the other Scotch banks. All the dealers in circulating bills of ex- 
change, which those other banks had become so backward in dis- 


and was 
obliged 
to stop in 
two years. 


Its action 
and fail- 
ure in- 
creased 
the dis- 
tress of 
projectors 
and the 
country 
generally. 


but re- 
lieved the 
other 
Scotch 
banks. 



Another 
plan 
would 
have been 
to raise 
money on 
the securi- 
ties 

pledged 
by bor- 
rowers: 


this would 
have been 
a losing 
business, 


and even 
if profit- 


300 the wealth of nations 

counting, had recourse to this new bank, where they were received 
with open arms. Those other banks, therefore, were enabled to get 
very easily out of that fatal circle, from which they could not other- 
wise have disengaged themselves without incurring a considerable 
loss, and perhaps too even some degree of discredit. 

In the long-run, therefore, the operations of this bank increased 
the real distress of the country which it meant to relieve; and ef- 
fectually relieved from a very great distress those rivals whom it 
meant to supplant. 

At the first setting out of this bank, it was the opinion of some 
people, that how fast soever its coffers might be emptied, it might 
easily replenish them by raising money upon the securities of those 
to whom it had advanced its paper. Experience, I believe, soon 
convinced them that this method of raising money was by much too 
slow to answer their purpose; and that coffers which originally were 
so ill filled, and which emptied themselves so very fast, could be re- 
plenished by no other expedient but the ruinous one of drawing bills 
upon London, and when they became due, paying them by other 
draughts upon the same place with accumulated interest and com- 
mission, But though they had been able by this method to raise 
money as fast as they wanted it; yet, instead of making a profit, 
they must have suffered a loss by every such operation; so that in 
the long-run they must have ruined themselves as a mercantile 
company, though, perhaps, not so soon as by the more expensive 
practice of drawing and re-drawing. They could still have made 
nothing by the interest of the paper, which, being over and above 
what the circulation of the country could absorb and employ, re- 
turned upon them, in order to be exchanged for gold and silver, as 
fast as they issued it; and for the payment of which they were 
themselves continually obliged to borrow money. On the contrary, 
the whole expence of this borrowing, of employing agents to look 
out for people who had money to lend, of negociating with those 
people, and of drawing the proper bond or assignment, must have 
fallen upon them, and have been so much clear loss upon the bal- 
ance of their accounts. The project of replenishing their coffers in 
this manner may be compared to that of a man who had a water- 
pond from which a stream was continually running out, and into 
which no stream was continually running, but who proposed to keep 
it always equally full by employing a number of people to go con- 
tinually with buckets to a well at some miles distance in order to 
bring water to replenish it. 

But though this operation had proved, not only practicable, but 
profitable to the bank as a mercantile company; yet the country 



MONEY 301 

could have derived no benefit from it; but, on the contrary, must 
have suffered a very considerable loss by it. This operation could 
not augment in the smallest degree the quantity of money to be 
lent. It could only have erected this bank into a sort of general loan 
office for the whole country. Those who wanted to borrow, must 
have applied to this bank, instead of applying to the private per- 
sons who had lent it their money. But a bank which lends money, 
perhaps, to five hundred different people, the greater part of whom 
its directors can know very little about, is not likely to be more 
judicious in the choice of its debtors, than a private person who 
lends out his money among a few people whom he knows, and in 
whose sober and frugal conduct he thinks he has good reason to con- 
fide. The debtors of such a bank, as that whose conduct I have been 
giving some account of, were likely, the greater part of them, to be 
chimerical projectors, the drawers and re-drawers of circulating 
bills of exchange, who would employ the money in extravagant un- 
dertakings, which, with all the assistance that could be given them, 
they would probably never be able to complete, and which, if they 
should be completed, would never repay the expence which they 
had really cost, would never afford a fund capable of maintaining 
a quantity of labour equal to that which had been employed about 
them. The sober and frugal debtors of private persons, on the con- 
trary, would be more likely to employ the money borrowed in sober 
undertakings which were proportioned to their capitals, and which, 
though they might have less of the grand and the marvellous, would 
have more of the solid and the profitable, which would repay with a 
large profit whatever had been laid out upon them, and whi(i would 
thus af ord a fund capable of maintaining a much greater quantity 
of labour than that which had been employed about them. The suc- 
cess of this operation, therefore, without increasing in the smallest 
degree the capital of the country, would only have transferred a 
great part of it from prudent and profitable, to imprudent and un- 
profitable undertakings. 

That the industry of Scotland languished for want of money to 
employ it, was the opinion of the famous Mr. Law. By establishing 
a bank of a particular kind, which he seems to have imagined might 
issue paper to the amount of the whole value of all the lands in the 
country, he proposed to remedy this want of money. The parliament 
of Scotland, when he first proposed his project, did not think proper 
to adopt it.^^ It was afterwards adopted, with some variations, by 

^Lectures, p. 211. The bookseller^s preface to the 2nd ed. of Money and 
Trade (below, p. 302, note 23) says the work consists of “some heads of a 
scheme which Mr. Law proposed to the Parliament of Scotland in the year 

1705” 


able 
would 
have been 
hurtful 
to the 
country. 


Law’s 
scheme 
has been 
sufficient- 
ly ex- 
plained by 
Du Ver- 
ney and 
Du Tot. 



The bank 
of Eng- 
land was 
estab- 
lished in 
1694, 


enlarged 
its stock 
in 1697, 


302 the wealth of nations 

the duke of Orleans, at that time regent of France. The idea of the 
possibility of multiplying paper money to almost any extent, was 
the real foundation of what is called the Mississippi scheme, the 
most extravagant project both of banking and stock-jobbing that, 
perhaps, the world ever saw. The different operations of this scheme 
are explained so fully, so clearly, and with so much order and dis- 
tinctness, by Mr. Du Verney, in his Examination of the Political 
Reflections upon Commerce and Finances of Mr. Du Tot,^^ that I 
shall not give any account of them.^^ The principles upon which it 
was founded are explained by Mr. Law himself, in a discourse con- 
cerning money and trade, which he published in Scotland when he 
first proposed his project.^^ The splendid, but visionary ideas which 
are set forth in that and some other works upon the same principles, 
still continue to make an impression upon many people, and have, 
perhaps, in part, contributed to that excess of banking, which has 
of late been complained of both in Scotland and in other places. 

The bank of England is the greatest bank of circulation in Eu- 
rope. It was incorporated, in pursuance of an act of parliament, by 
a charter under the great seal, dated the 27th of July, 1694. It at 
that time advanced to government the sum of one million two hun- 
dred thousand pounds, for an annuity of one hundred thousand 
pounds: or for g 6 pooL a year interest, at the rate of eight per cent., 
and 4,oooL a year for the expence of management. The credit of the 
new government, established by the Revolution, we may believe, 
must have been very low, when it was obliged to borrow at so high 
an interest. 

In 1697 the bank, was allowed to enlarge its capital stock by an 
ingraftment of 1,001,171/. 105. Its whole capital stock, therefore, 
amounted at this time to 2,201,171/ loj. This engraftment is said 
to have been for the support of public credit. In 1696, tallies had 
been at forty, and fifty, and sixty per cent, discount, and bank notes 
at twenty per cent.^^ During the great recoinage of the silver, which 

^ These two books are in Bonar, Catalogue of Adam SmitWs Library, pp 
35, 36. Du Tot’s is Rifiexions polUiques sur les Finances et le Commerce, oil 
Von examine quelles ont iti sur les revenus, les denries, le change itranger et 
consequemment sur notre commerce, les influences des augmentations et des 
diminutions des valeurs numiraires des monnoyes. La Haye, 1754. Ver- 
ney’s is Examen du livre intituU *‘Riflexions poUtiques sur les Finances et le 
Commerce,” La Haye, 1740 

“In Lectures there is an account, apparently derived from Du Verney, 
which extends over eight pages, 211-218. 

^ Money and Trade Considered, with a Proposal for Supplying the Nation 
with Money, 1705. 

“ James Postlethwayt’s History of the Public Revenue, page 301 History 
of the Public Revenue from 1688 to 1753, an Appendix to 1758, by James 
Postlethwayt, F.R.S., 1759 ; see also below, p. 864. 



MONEY 303 

was going on at this time, the bank had thought proper to discon- 
tinue the payment of its notes, which necessarily occasioned their 
discredit. 

In pursuance of the 7th Anne, c. vii. the bank advanced and paid 
into the exchequer, the sum of 400, ooo^.; making in all the sum of 
1,600,000/. which it had advanced upon its original annuity of 96,- 
000/. interest and 4,000/. for expence of management. In 1708, 
therefore, thet credit of government was as good as that of private 
persons, since it could borrow at six per cent, interest, the common 
legal and market rate of those times. In pursuance of the same act, 
the bank cancelled exchequer bills to the amount of 1,775,027/. 17J. 
lo^d. at six per cent, interest, and was at the same time allowed 
to take in subscriptions for doubling its capital. In 1708, therefore, 
the capital of the bank amounted to 4,402,343/.; and it had ad- 
vanced to government the sum of 3,375,027/. 17^. io\d. 

By a call of fifteen per cent, in 1709, there was paid in and made 
stock 656,204/. u. ()d,\ and by another of ten per cent, in 1710, 
501,448/. 12^. lid. In consequence of those two calls, therefore, 
the bank capital amounted to S,SS9,99S/. 14 ^. 8c/. 

In pursuance of the 3d George I. c, 8. the bank delivered up two 
millions of exchequer bills to be cancelled. It had at this time, there- 
fore, advanced to government 5,375,027/. l^s, lodP In pursu- 
ance of the 8th George L c. 21. the bank purchased of the South 
Sea Company, stock to the amount of 4,000,000/.: and in 1722, in 
consequence of the subscriptions which it had taken in for enabling 
it to make this purchase, its capital stock was increased by 3,400,- 
000/. At this time, therefore, the bank had advanced to the public 
9,375,027/. i^s, 10^ d,\ and its capital stock amounted only to 
8,959,995/. 14s, Sd, It was upon this occasion that the sum which 
the bank had advanced to the public, and for which it received in- 
terest, began first to exceed its capital stock, or the sum for which 
it paid a dividend to the proprietors of bank stock; or, in other 
words, that the bank began to have an undivided capital, over and 
above its divided one. It has continued to have an undivided capi- 
tal of the same kind ever since. In 1746, the bank had, upon dif- 
ferent occasions, advanced to the public 11,686,800/. and its di- 
vided capital had been raised by different calls and subscriptions to 
10,780,000/.^® The state of those two sums has continued to be the 
same ever since. In pursuance of the 4th of George III. c. 25. the 

“ These three lines are not in ed. i. 

“ From, “it was incorporated,” on p. 302, to this point is an abstract of the 
“Historical State of the Bank of England,” in Postlethwayt’s History of the 
Public Revenue, pp. 301-3 10. The totals are taken from the bottom of Postle- 
thwayt’s pages. 


in 1708, 


in 1709 
and 1710 


in 1717, 
and later 



The rate 
of interest 
received 
by it from 
the public 
has been 
reduced 
from 8 to 
3 per cent, 
and its 
dividend 
has lately 
been 5^4 
per cent. 

It acts as 
a great 
engine of 
state. 


The op- 
erations 
of bank- 
ing turn 
dead 

stock into 
produc- 
tive capi- 
tal, 


304 the wealth of nations 

bank agreed to pay to government for the renewal of its charter 
110,000/. without interest or repayment. This sum, therefore, did 
not increase either of those two other sums. 

The dividend of the bank has varied according to the variations 
in the rate of the interest which it has, at different times, received 
for the money it had advanced to the public, as well as according to 
other circumstances. This rate of interest has gradually been re- 
duced from eight to three per cent. For some years past the bank 
dividend has been at five and a half per cent. 

The stability of the bank of England is equal to that of the Brit- 
ish government. All that it has advanced to the public must be lost 
before its creditors can sustain any loss. No other banking company 
in England can be established by act of parliament, or can consist 
of more than six members. It acts, not only as an ordinary bank, 
but as a great engine of state. It receives and pays the greater part 
of the annuities which are due to the creditors of the public, it cir- 
culates exchequer bills, and it advances to government the annual 
amount of the land and malt taxes, which are frequently not paid 
up till some years thereafter. In those different operations, its duty 
to the public may sometimes have obliged it, without any fault of 
its directors, to overstock the circulation with paper money. It like- 
wise discounts merchants bills, and has, upon several different oc- 
casions, supported the credit of the principal houses, not only of 
England, but of Hamburgh and Holland. Upon one occasion, in 
1763, it is said to have advanced for this purpose, in one week, 
about 1,6000,000/.; a great part of it in bullion. I do not, however, 
pretend to warrant either the greatness of the sum, or the shortness 
of the time. Upon other occasions, this great company has been re- 
duced to the necessity of paying in sixpences.^’^ 

It is not by augmenting the capital of the country, but by ren- 
dering a greater part of that capital active and productive than 
would otherwise be so, that the most judicious operations of bank- 
ing can increase the industry of the country. That part of* his capi- 
tal which a dealer is obliged to keep by him unemployed, and in 
ready money for answering occasional demands, is so much dead 
stock, which, so long as it remains in this situation, produces noth- 
ing either to him or to his country. The judicious operations of 
banking enable him to convert this dead stock into active and pro- 
ductive stock; into materials to work upon, into tools to work with, 
and into provisions and subsistence to work for; into stock which 

In 1743. Magens, Universal Merchant, p. 31, suggests that there may have 
been suspicions that the money was being drawn out for the support of the 
rebellion. 



MONEY 305 

produces something both to himself and to his country. The gold 
and silver money which circulates in any country, and by means of 
which the produce of its land and labour is annually circulated and 
distributed to the proper consumers, is, in the same manner as the 
ready money of the dealer, all dead stock. It is a very valuable part 
of the capital of the country, which produces nothing to the coun- 
try. The judicious operations of banking, by substituting paper in 
the room of a great part of this gold and silver, enables the country 
to convert a great part of this dead stock into active and productive 
stock; into stock which produces something to the country. The 
gold and silver money which circulates in any country may very 
properly be compared to a highway, which, while it circulates and 
carries to market all the grass and corn of the country, produces it- 
self not a single pile of either. The judicious operations of banking, 
by providing, if I may be allowed so violent a metaphor, a sort of 
waggon-way through the air; enable the country to convert, as it 
were, a great part of its highways into good pastures and cornfields, 
and thereby to increase very considerably the annual produce of its 
land and labour. The commerce and industry of the country, how- 
ever, it must be acknowledged, though they may be somewhat aug- 
mented, cannot be altogether so secure, when they are thus, as it 
were, suspended upon the Daedalian wings of paper money, as when 
they travel about upon the solid ground of gold and silver. Over and 
above the accidents to which they are exposed from the unskilful- 
ness of the conductors of this paper money, they are liable to sev- 
eral others, from which no prudence or skill of those conductors can 
guard them. 

An unsuccessful war, for example, in which the enemy got posses- 
sion of the capital, and consequently of that treasure which sup- 
ported the credt of the paper money, would occasion a much great- 
er confusion in a country where the whole circulation was carried on 
by paper, than in one where the greater part of it was carried on by 
gold and silver. The usual instrument of commerce having losUts 
value, no exchanges could be made but either by barter or upon 
credit. All taxes having been usually paid in paper money, the 
prince would not have wherewithal either to pay his troops, or to 
furnish his magazines; and the state of the country would be much 
more irretrievable than if the greater part of its circulation had con- 
sisted in gold and silver. A prince, anxious to maintain his domin- 
ions at all times in the state in which he can most easily defend 
them, ought, upon this account, to guard, not only against that ex- 
cessive multiplication of paper money which ruins the very banks 

“Eds. I and 2 read “him.” 


but make 
commerce 
and in- 
dustry 
somewhat 
less 
secure. 


Precau- 
tions 
shouldbe 
taken to 
prevent 
the great- 
er part of 
the circu- 
lation be- 
ing jBUed 
with 
paper. 



Circula- 
tion may 
be divid- 
ed into 
that be- 
tween 
dealers 
and that 
between 
dealers 
and con- 
sumers 


The circu- 
lation of 
paper 
maybe 
corded 
to the 
former by 
not allow- 
ing notes 
for small 
sums. 


306 the wealth of nations 

which issue it; but even against that multiplication of it, which en- 
ables them to fill the greater part of the circulation of the country 
with it. 

The circulation of every country may be considered as divided 
into two different branches; the circulation of the dealers with one 
another, and the circulation between the dealers and the consumers. 
Though the same pieces of money, whether paper or metal, may be 
employed sometimes in the one circulation and sometimes in the 
other, yet as both are constantly going on at the same time, each 
requires a certain stock of money of one kind or another, to carry it 
on. The value of the goods circulated between the different dealers, 
never can exceed the value of those circulated between the dealers 
and the consumers; whatever is bought by the dealers, being ulti- 
mately destined to be sold to the consumers. The circulation be- 
tween the dealers, as it is carried on by wholesale, requires general- 
ly a pretty large sum for every particular transaction. That between 
the dealers and the consumers, on the contrary, as it is generally 
carried on by retail, frequently requires but very small ones, a 
shilling, or even a halfpenny, being often sufficient. But small sums 
circulate much faster than large ones. A shilling changes masters 
more frequently than a guinea, and a halfpenny more frequently 
than a shilling. Though the annual purchases of all the consumers, 
therefore, are at least equal in value to those of all the dealers, they 
can generally be transacted with a much smaller quantity of 
money; the same pieces, by a more rapid circulation, serving as 
the instrument of many more purchases of the one kind than of the 
other. 

Paper money may be so regulated, as either to confine itself very 
much to the circulation between the different dealers, or to extend 
itself likewise to a great part of that between the dealers and the 
consumers. Where no bank notes are circulated under ten pounds 
value, as in London,^^ paper money confines itself very much to the 
circulation between the dealers. When a ten pound bank note comes 
into the hands of a consumer, he is generally obliged to change it at 
the first shop where he has occasion to purchase five shillings worth 
of goods; so that it often returns into the hands of a dealer, before 
the consumer has spent the fortieth part of the money. Where bank 
notes are issued for so small sums as twenty shillings, as in Scot- 
land, paper money extends itself to a considerable part of the cir- 
culation between dealers and consumers. Before the act of parlia- 
ment, which put a stop to the circulation of ten and five shilling 

^ The Bank of England issued none under £20 till 1759, when £15 and £10 
notes were mtroduced.— Anderson, Commerce, ad. 1739 



MONEY 307 

notes, it filled a still greater part of that circulation. In the cur- 
rencies of North America, paper was commonly issued for so small 
a sum as a shilling, and filled almost the whole of that circulation. 
In some paper currencies of Yorkshire, it was issued even for so 
small a sum as a sixpence. 

Where the issuing of bank notes for such very small sums is al- 
lowed and commonly practised, many mean people are both en- 
abled and encouraged to become bankers. A person whose promis- 
sory note for five pounds, or even for twenty shillings, would be re- 
jected by every body, will get it to be received without scruple when 
it is issued for so small a sum as a sixpence. But the frequent bank- 
ruptcies to which such beggarly baiiers must be liable, may oc- 
casion a very considerable inconveniency, and sometimes even a 
very great calamity, to many poor people who had received their 
notes in pa5mient. 

It were better, perhaps, that no bank notes were issued in any 
part of the kingdom for a smaller sum than five pounds. Paper mon- 
ey would then, probably, confine itself, in every part of the king- 
dom, to the circulation between the different dealers, as much as it 
does at present in London, where no bank notes are issued under 
ten pounds value; five pounds being, in most parts of the kingdom, 
a sum which, though it will purchase, perhaps, little more than half 
the quantity of goods, is as much considered, and is as seldom spent 
all at once, as ten pounds are amidst the profuse expence of London. 

Where paper money, it is to be observed, is pretty much confined 
to the circulation between dealers and dealers, as at London, there 
is always plenty of gold and silver. Where it extends itself to a con- 
siderable part of the circulation between dealers and consumers, as 
in Scotland, and still more in North America, it banishes gold and 
silver almost entirely from the country; almost all the ordinary 
transactions of its interior commerce being thus carried on by 
paper. The suppression of ten and five shilling bank notes, some- 
what relieved the scarcity of gold and silver in Scotland; and the 
suppression of twenty shilling notes, would probably relieve it still 
more. Those metals are said to have become more abundant in 
America, since the suppression of some of their paper currencies. 
They are said, likewise, to have been more abundant before the 
institution of those currencies. 

Though paper money should be pretty much confined to the cir- 
culation between dealers and dealers, yet banks and bankers might 
still be able to give nearly the same assistance to the industry and 
commerce of the country, as they had done when paper money filled 

^^^Geo.IIL, c. 49. 


The issue 
of such 
notes en- 
ables 
mean 
people to 
become 
bankers. 


None for 
less than 
£5 should 
be issued. 


This 

would se- 
cure the 
circula- 
tion of 
plenty of 
gold and 
silver, 


and 

would not 
prevent 
banks 
from giv- 



ing suffi- 
cient as- 
sistance to 
traders. 


A law 
against 
small 
notes 
would be 
a viola- 
tion of 
natural 
liberty 
necessary 
for the se- 
curity of 
the so- 
ciety. 


Paper 
money 
payable 
on de- 
mand is 
equal to 
gold and 
silver, 

and does 
not raise 
prices; 


308 the wealth of nations 

almost the whole circulation. The ready money which a dealer is 
obliged to keep by him, for answering occasional demands, is des- 
tined altogether for the circulation between himself and other deal- 
ers, of whom he buys goods. He has no occasion to keep any by him 
for the circulation between himself and the consumers, who are his 
customers, and who bring ready money to him, instead of taking 
any from him. Though no paper money, therefore, was allowed to 
be issued, but for such sums as would confine it pretty much to the 
circulation between dealers and dealers; yet, partly by discounting 
real bills of exchange, and partly by lending upon cash accounts, 
banks and bankers might still be able to relieve the greater part of 
those dealers from the necessity of keeping any considerable part of 
their stock by them, unemployed and in ready money, for answer- 
ing occasional demands. They might still be able to give the utmost 
assistance which banks and bankers can, with propriety, give to 
traders of every kind. 

To restrain private people, it may be said, from receiving in pay- 
ment the promissory notes of a banker, for any sum whether great 
or small, when they themselves are willing to receive them; or, to 
restrain a banker from issuing such notes, when all his neighbours 
are willing to accept of them, is a manifest violation of that natural 
liberty which it is the proper business of law, not to infringe, but to 
support. Such regulations may, no doubt, be considered as in some 
respect a violation of natural liberty. But those exertions of the 
natural liberty of a few individuals, which might endanger the se- 
curity of the whole society, are, and ought to be, restrained by the 
laws of all governments; of the most free, as well as of the most 
despotical. The obligation of building party walls, in order to pre- 
vent the communication of fire, is a violation of natural liberty, ex- 
actly of the same kind with the regulations of the banking trade 
which are here proposed. 

A paper money consisting in bank notes, issued by people of un- 
doubted credit, payable upon demand without any condition, and 
in fact always readily paid as soon as presented, is, in every respect, 
equal in value to gold and silver money; since gold and silver money 
can at any time be had for it. Whatever is either bought or sold for 
such paper, must necessarily be bought or sold as cheap as it could 
have been for gold and silver. 

The increase of paper money, it has been said, by augmenting the 
quantity, and consequently diminishing the value of the whole cur- 
rency, necessarily augments the money price of commodities. But 
as the quantity of gold and silver, which is taken from the currency, 
is always equal to the quantity of paper which is added to it, paper 



MONEY 309 

money does not necessarily increase the quantity of the whole cur- 
rency. From the beginning of the last century to the present time, 
provisions never were cheaper in Scotland than in 1759, though, 
from the circulation of ten and five shilling bank notes, there was 
then more paper money in the country than at present. The propor- 
tion between the price of provisions in Scotland and that in Eng- 
land, is the same now as before the great multiplication of banking 
companies in Scotland. Corn is, upon most occasions, fully as cheap 
in England as in France; though there is a great deal of paper 
money in England, and scarce any in France. In 1751 and in 1752, 
when Mr. Hume published his Political Discourses,®^ and soon 
after the great multiplication of paper money in Scotland, there 
was a very sensible rise in the price of provisions, owing, probably, 
to the badness of the seasons, and not to the multiplication of paper 
money. 

It would be otherwise, indeed, with a paper money consisting in 
promissory notes, of which the immediate payment depended, in 
any respect, either upon the good will of those who issued them; or 
upon a condition which the holder of the notes might not always 
have it in his power to fulfil; or of which the payment was not exi- 
gible till after a certain number of years, and which in the mean 
time bore no interest. Such a paper money would, no doubt, fall 
more or less below the value of gold and silver, according as the dif- 
ficulty or uncertainty of obtaining immediate payment was sup- 
posed to be greater or less; or according to the greater or less dis- 
tance of time at which payment was exigible. 

Some years ago the different banking companies of Scotland were 
in the practice of inserting into their bank notes, what they called 
an Optional Clause, by which they promised payment to the bearer, 
either as soon as the note should be presented, or, in the option of 
the directors, six months after such presentment, together with the 
legal interest for the said six months. The directors of some of those 
banks sometimes took advantage of this optional clause, and some- 
times threatened those who demanded gold and silver in exchange 
for a considerable number of their notes, that they would take ad- 
vantage of it, unless such demanders would content themselves with 
a part of what they demanded. The promissory notes of those bank- 
ing companies constituted at that time the far greater part of the 
currency of Scotland, which this uncertainty of payment neces- 

^^The reference is probably to the passages in the “Discourse of Money,” 
and the “Discourse of the Balance of Trade,” where Hume censures paper 
money as the cause of a rise of prices.— Political Discourses, 1752, pp. 43-45 > 
89-91 ; cp. Lectures, p. 197. 


but paper 
not repay- 
able on 
demand 
would fall 
below 
gold and 
silver, 


as hap- 
pened in 
Scotland 
during 
the preva- 
lence of 
the Op- 
tional 
Clause, 



and must 
have hap- 
pened in 
regard to 
the York- 
shire cur- 
rencies 
when 
small 
sums were 
repayable 
in 

guineas. 

The 
North 
American 
paper 
currencies 
consisted 
of gov- 
ernment 
notes re- 
payable 
at a dis- 
tant date, 


310 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

sarily degraded below the value of gold and silver money. During 
the continuance of this abuse (which prevailed chiefly in 1762, 
1763, and 1764), while the exchange between London and Carlisle 
was at par, that between London and Dumfries would sometimes be 
four per cent, against Dumfries, though this town is not thirty miles 
distant from Carlisle. But at Carlisle, bills were paid in gold and 
silver; whereas at Dumfries they were paid in Scotch bank notes, 
and the uncertainty of getting those bank notes exchanged for gold 
and silver coin had thus degraded them four per cent, below the 
value of that coin. The same act of parliament which suppressed 
ten and five shilling bank notes, suppressed likewise this optional 
clause,^^ and thereby restored the exchange between England and 
Scotland to its natural rate, or to what the course of trade and re- 
mittances might happen to make it. 

In the paper currencies of Yorkshire, the payment of so small a 
sum as a sixpence sometimes depended upon the condition that the 
holder of the note should bring the change of a guinea to the person 
who issued it; a condition, which the holders of such notes might 
frequently find it very difficult to fulfil, and which must have de- 
graded this currency below the value of gold and silver money. An 
act of parliament, accordingly, declared all such clauses unlawful, 
and suppressed, in the same manner as in Scotland, all promissory 
notes, payable to the bearer, under twenty shillings value.^® 

The paper currencies of North America consisted, not in bank 
notes payable to the bearer on demand, but in a government paper, 
of which the payment was not exigible till several years after it was 
issued: And though the colony governments paid no interest to the 
holders of this paper, they declared it to be, and in fact rendered it, 
a legal tender of payment for the full value for which it was issued. 
But allowing the colony security to be perfectly good, a hundred 
pounds payable fifteen years hence, for example, in a country where 
interest is at six per cent, is worth little more than forty pounds 
ready money. To oblige a creditor, therefore, to accept of this as 
full payment for a debt of a hundred pounds actually paid down in 
ready money, was an act of such violent injustice, as has scarce, 
perhaps, been attempted by the government of any other country 
which pretended to be free. It bears the evident marks of having 
originally been, what the honest and downright Doctor Douglas as- 
sures us it was, a scheme of fraudulent debtors to cheat their cred- 
itors.^^ The government of Pennsylvania, indeed, pretended, upon 

5 Geo. HI., c. 49 ; referred to above, p. 306. **15 Geo. III., c. 51. 

knavish device of fraudulent debtors of the loan money to pay off 
their loans at a very depreciated value ” William Douglass, M.D., Summary, 



MONEY 311 

their first emission of paper money, in 1722, to render their paper of 
equal value with, gold and silver, by enacting penalties against all 
those who made any difference in the price of their goods when they 
sold them for a colony paper, and when they sold them for gold and 
silver; a regulation equally tyrannical, but much less effectual than 
that which it was meant to support. A positive law may render a 
shilling a legal tender for a guinea; because it may direct the courts 
of justice to discharge the debtor who has made that tender. But no 
positive law can oblige a person who sells goods, and who is at lib- 
erty to sell or not to sell, as he pleases, to accept of a shilling as 
equivalent to a guinea in the price of them. Notwithstanding any 
regulation of this kind, it appeared by the course of exchange with 
Great Britain, that a hundred pounds sterling was occasionally con- 
sidered as equivalent, in some of the colonies, to a hundred and 
thirty pounds, and in others to so great a sum as eleven hundred 
pounds currency; this difference in the value arising from the dif- 
ference in the quantity of paper emitted in the different colonies, 
and in the distance and probability of the term of its final discharge 
and redemption. 

No law, therefore, could be more equitable than the act of parlia- 
ment, so unjustly complained of in the colonies, which declared that 
no paper currency to be emitted there in time coming, should be a 
legal tender of payment.^® 

Pennsylvania was always more moderate in its emissions of paper 
money than any other of our colonies. Its paper currency accord- 
ingly is said never to have sunk below the value of the gold and sil- 
ver which was current in the colony before the first emission of its 
paper money. Before that emission, the colony had raised the de- 
nomination of its coin, and had, by act of assembly, ordered five 
shillings sterling to pass in the colony for six and three-pence, and 
afterwards for six and eight-pence. A pound colony currency, there- 
fore, even when that currency was gold and silver, was more than 
thirty per cent, below the value of a pound sterling, and when that 
currency was turned into paper, it was seldom much more than 
thirty per cent, below that value. The pretence for raising the de- 
nomination of the coin, was to prevent the exportation of gold and 
silver, by making equal quantities of those metals pass for greater 
sums in the colony than they did in the mother country. It was 

Historical and Political, of the First Planting, Progressive Improvements,^ and 
Present State of the British Settlements in North America, vol. ii., p. 
107. The author uses strong language in many places about what he calls 
“this accursed affair of plantation paper currencies,” vol. ii., p. 13, note is); 
cp. vol. i., pp. 310, 359; vol. ii., pp. 254-255, 334-335- 
4 Geo. III., c. 34. 


and de- 
preciated 
the cur- 
rency to 
a great 
degree. 


They were 
therefore 
justly 
prohibit- 
ed. 

Pennsyl- 

vania 

was 

moderate 
in its 
issues, 
audits 
currency 
never 
went be- 
low the 
real par. 



The colo- 
nial pa- 
per was 
somewhat 
supported 
by being 
received 
in pay- 
ment of 
taxes. 


A require- 
ment that 
certain 
taxes 
should be 
paid in 
particular 
paper 
money 
might 
give that 
paper a 
certain 
value 
even if it 
was irre- 
deemable. 


A paper 
currency 
depreci- 
ated be- 
low the 


312 the wealth of nations 

found, however, that the price of all goods from the mother country 
rose exactly in proportion as they raised the denomination of their 
coin, so that their gold and silver were exported as fast as ever. 

The paper of each colony being received in the payment of the 
provincial taxes, for the full value for which it had been issued, it 
necessarily derived from this use some additional value, over and 
above what it would have had, from the real or supposed distance 
of the term of its final discharge and redemption. This additional 
value was greater or less, according as the quantity of paper issued 
was more or less above what could be employed in the payment of 
the taxes of the particular colony which issued it. It was in all the 
colonies very much above what could be employed in this manner. 

A prince, who should enact that a certain proportion of his taxes 
should be paid in a paper money of a certain kind, might thereby 
give a certain value to this paper money; even though the term of 
its final discharge and redemption should depend altogether upon 
the will of the prince. If the bank which issued this paper was care- 
ful to keep the quantity of it always somewhat below what could 
easily be employed in this manner, the demand for it might be such 
as to make it even bear a premium, or sell for somewhat more in the 
market than the quantity of gold or silver currency for which it was 
issued. Some people account in this manner for what is called the 
Agio of the bank of Amsterdam, or for the superiority of bank 
money over current money; though this bank money, as they pre- 
tend, cannot be taken out of the bank at the will of the owner. The 
greater part of foreign bills of exchange must be paid in bank 
money, that is, by a transfer in the books of the bank; and the di- 
rectors of the bank, they allege, are careful to keep the whole quan- 
tity of bank money always below what this use occasions a demand 
for. It is upon this account, they say, that bank money sells for a 
premium, or bears an agio of four or five per cent, above the same 
nominal sum of the gold and silver currency of the country. This 
account of the bank of Amsterdam, however, it will appear here- 
after,®^ is in a great measure chimerical.®^ 

A paper currency which falls below the value of gold and silver 
coin, does not thereby sink the value of those metals, or occasion 
equal quantities of them ®® to exchange for a smaller quantity of 
goods of any other kind. The proportion between the value of gold 

Below, pp. 446-455. See also the “Advertisement” or preface to the 4th 
ed., above. 

Ed. I reads “This account of the Bank of Amsterdam, however, I have 
reason to believe, is altogether chimerical.” 

Ed. I reads “sink the value of gold and silver, or occasion equal quantities 
of those metals.” 



MONEY 313 

and silver and that of goods of any other kind, depends in all cases, 
not upon the nature or quantity of any particular paper money, 
which may be current in any particular country, but upon the rich- 
ness or poverty of the mines, which happen at any particular time 
to supply the great market of the commercial world with those met- 
als. It depends upon the proportion between the quantity of labour 
which is necessary in order to bring a certain quantity of gold and 
silver to market, and that which is necessary in order to bring thith- 
er a certain quantity of any other sort of goods. 

If bankers are restrained from issuing any circulating bank notes 
or notes payable to the bearer, for less than a certain sum; and if 
they are subjected to the obligation of an immediate and uncondi- 
tional payment of such bank notes as soon as presented, their trade 
may, with safety to the public, be rendered in all other respects 
perfectly free. The late multiplication of banking companies in 
both parts of the united kingdom, an event by which many people 
have been much alarmed, instead of diminishing, increases the se- 
curity of the public. It obliges all of them to be more circumspect 
in their conduct, and, by not extending their currency beyond its 
due proportion to their cash, to guard themselves against those 
malicious runs, which the rivalship of so many competitors is al- 
ways ready to bring upon them. It restrains the circulation of each 
particular company within a narrower circle, and reduces their cir- 
culating notes to a smaller number. By dividing the whole circula- 
tion into a greater number of parts, the failure of any one com- 
pany, an accident which, in the course of things, must sometimes 
happen, becomes of less consequence to the public. This free com- 
petition too obliges all bankers to be more liberal in their dealings 
with their customers, lest their rivals should carry them away. In 
general, if any branch of trade, or any division of labour, be advan- 
tageous to the public, the freer and more general the competition, 
it will always be the more so. 


value of 
the coin 
does not 
sink the 
value of 
gold and 
Slver. 


The only 
restric- 
tions on 
banking 
which are 
necessary 
are the 
prohibi- 
tion of 
small 
bank 
notes and 
the re- 
quirement 
that all 
notes shall 
be repaid 
on de- 
mand. 


t 



There are 
two sorts 
of labour, 
produc- 
tive and 
unpro- 
ductive. 


m 


CHAPTER III 

OF THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL, OR OF PRODUCTIVE AND UN- 
PRODUCTIVE LABOUR 

There is one sort of labour which adds to the value of the subject 
upon which it is bestowed: there is another which has no such ef- 
fect. The former, as it produces a value, may be called productive; 
the latter, unproductive ^ labour. Thus the labour of a manufac- 
turer adds, generally, to the value of the materials which he works 
upon, that of his own maintenance, and of his master’s profit. The 
labour of a menial servant, on the contrary, adds to the value of 
nothing. Though the manufacturer has his wages advanced to him 
by his master, he, in reality, costs him no expence, the value of 
those wages being generally restored, together with a profit, in the 
improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed. 
But the maintenance of a menial servant never is restored. A man 
grows rich by employing a multitude of manufacturers: he grows 
poor, by maintaining a multitude of menial servants.^ The labour 
of the latter, however, has its value, and deserves its reward as well 
as that of the former. But the labour of the manufacturer fixes and 
realizes itself in some particular subject or vendible commodity, 
which lasts for some time at least after that labour is past. It is, as 
it were, a certain quantity of labour stocked and stored up to be 
employed, if necessary, upon some other occasion. That subject, or 
what is the same thing, the price of that subject, can afterwards, if 
necessary, put into motion a quantity of labour equal to that which 
had originally produced it. The labour of the menial servant, on the 

^Some French authors of great learning and ingenuity have used those 
words in a different sense. In the last chapter of the fourth book I shall en- 
deavour to show that their sense is an improper one. 

® In the argument which follows in the text the fact is overlooked that this 
is only true when the manufacturers are employed to produce commodities 
for sale and when the menial servj^nts are employed merely for the comfort 
of the employer. A man may and often does grow poor by employing people 
to make “particular subjects or vendible commodities” for his own consump- 
tion, and an innkeeper may and often does grow rich by employing menial 
servants. 


314 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 3^5 

contrary, does not fix or realize itself in any particular subject or 
vendible commodity. His services generally perish in the very in- 
stant of their performance, and seldom leave any trace or value be- 
hind them, for which an equal quantity of service could afterwards 
be procured. 

The labour of some of the most respectable orders in the society 
is, like that of menial servants, unproductive of any value, and does 
not fix or realize itself in any permanent subject, or vendible com- 
modity, which endures after that labour is past, and for which an 
equal quantity of labour could afterwards be procured. The sover- 
eign, for example, with all the officers both of justice and war who 
serve under him, the whole army and navy, are unproductive la- 
bourers. They are the servants of the public, and are maintained 
by a part of the annual produce of the industry of other people. 
Their service, how honourable, how useful,® or how necessary so- 
ever, produces nothing for which an equal quantity of service can 
afterwards be procured. The protection, security, and defence of 
the commonwealth, the effect of their labour this year, will not pur- 
chase its protection, security, and defence for the year to come. In 
the same class must be ranked, some both of the gravest and most 
important, and some of the most frivolous professions: churchmen, 
lawyers, physicians, men of letters of all kinds; players, buffoons, 
musicians, opera-singers, opera-dancers, &c. The labour of the 
meanest of these has a certain value, regulated by the very same 
principles which regulate that of every other sort of labour; and 
that of the noblest and most useful, produces nothing which could 
afterwards purchase or procure an equal quantity of labour. Like 
the declamation of the actor, the harangue of the orator, or the 
tune of the musician, the work of all of them perishes in the very 
instant of its production. 

Both productive and unproductive labourers, and those who do 
not labour at all, are all equally maintained by the annual produce 
of the land and labour of the country. This produce, how great so- 
ever, can never be infinite, but must have certain limits. According, 
therefore, as a smaller or greater proportion of it is in any one year 
employed in maintaining unproductive hands, the more in the one 
case and the less in the other will remain for the productive, and 
the next year’s produce will be greater or smaller accordingly; the 
whole annual produce, if we except the spontaneous productions of 
the earth, being the effect of productive labour. 

Though the whole annual produce of the land and labour of ev- 

® But in the “Introduction and Plan of the Work ” “useful” is coupled with 
“productive,” and used as equivalent to it. 


Many 
kinds of 
labour be- 
sides 
menial 
service 
are un- 
produc- 
tive. 


The pro- 
portion 
of the 
produce 
employed 
in main- 
taining 
produc- 
tive hands 
deter- 
mines the 
next 
year’s 
produce. 



Part of 
the pro- 
duce re- 
places 
capital, 
part con- 
stitutes 
profit and 
rent. 


That 
which re- 
places 
capital 
employs 
none but 
produc- 
tive 
hands, 


while un- 
produc- 
tive hands 
and those 
who do 
not labour 
are sup- 
ported 
by reve- 
nue. 


316 the wealth of nations 

ery country, is, no doubt, ultimately destined for supplying the con- 
sumption of its inhabitants, and for procuring a revenue to them; 
yet when it first comes either from the ground, or from the hands 
of the productive labourers, it naturally divides itself into two 
parts. One of them, and frequently the largest, is, in the first place, 
destined for replacing a capital, or for renewing the provisions, ma- 
terials, and finished work, which had been withdrawn from a capi- 
tal; the other for constituting a revenue either to the owner of this 
capital, as the profit of his stock; or to some other person, as the 
rent of his land. Thus, of the produce of land, one part replaces the 
capital of the farmer; the other pays his profit and the rent of the 
landlord; and thus constitutes a revenue both to the owner of this 
capital, as the profits of his stock; and to some other person, as the 
rent of his land. Of the produce of a great manufactory, in the same 
manner, one part, and that always the largest, replaces the capital 
of the undertaker of the work; the other pays his profit, and thus 
constitutes a revenue to the owner of this capital.^ 

That part of the annual produce of the land and labour of any 
country which replaces a capital, never is immediately employed to 
maintain any but productive hands. It pays the wages of produc- 
tive labour only. That which is immediately destined for consti- 
tuting a revenue either as profit or as rent, may maintain indiffer- 
ently either productive or unproductive hands. 

Whatever part of his stock a man employs as a capital, he always 
expects is to be replaced to him with a profit. He employs it, there- 
fore, in maintaining productive hands only; and after having 
served in the function of a capital to him, it constitutes a revenue 
to them. Whenever he employs any part of it in maintaining un- 
productive hands of any kind, that part is, from that moment, 
withdrawn from his capital, and placed in his stock reserved for 
immediate consumption. 

Unproductive labourers, and those who do not labour at all, are 
all maintained by revenue; either, first, by that part of the annual 
produce which is originally destined for constituting a revenue to 
some particular persons, either as the rent of land or as the profits 
of stock; or, secondly, by that part which, though originally des- 
tined for replacing a capital and for maintaining productive labour- 
ers only, yet when it comes into their hands, whatever part of it is 
over and above their necessary subsistence, may be employed in 
maintaining indifferently either productive or unproductive hands. 

^ It must be observed that in this paragraph produce is not used in the or- 
dinary economic sense of income or net produce, but as including all products, 
e,g., lie oil used in weaving machinery as well as the cloth. 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 3i7 

Thus, not only the great landlord or the rich merchant, but even 
the common workman, if his wages are considerable, may maintain 
a menial servant; or he may sometimes go to a play or a puppet- 
show, and so contribute his share towards maintaining one set of 
unproductive labourers; or he may pay some taxes, and thus help 
to maintain another set, more honourable and useful, indeed, but 
equally unproductive. No part of the annual produce, however, 
which had been originally destined to replace a capital, is ever di- 
rected towards maintaining unproductive hands, till after it has put 
into motion its full complement of productive labour, or all that it 
could put into motion in the way in which it was employed. The 
workman must have earned his wages by work done, before he can 
employ any part of them in this manner. That part too is generally 
but a small one. It is his spare revenue only, of which productive 
labourers have seldom a great deal. They generally have some, 
however; and in the payment of taxes the greatness of their num- 
ber may compensate, in some measure, the smallness of their con- 
tribution. The rent of land and the profits of stock are every-where, 
therefore, the principal sources from which unproductive hands 
derive their subsistence. These are the two sorts of revenue of 
which the owners have generally most to spare. They might both 
maintain indifferently either productive or unproductive hands. 
They seem, however, to have some predilection for the latter. The 
expence of a great lord feeds generally more idle than industrious 
people. The rich merchant, though with his capital he maintains 
industrious people only, yet by his expence, that is, by the employ- 
ment of his revenue, he feeds commonly the very same sort as the 
great lord. 

The proportion, therefore, between the productive and unpro- 
ductive hands, depends very much in every country upon the pro- 
portion between that part of the annual produce, which, as soon as 
it comes either from the ground or from the hands of the produc- 
tive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, and that which is 
destined for constituting a revenue, either as rent, or as profit. This 
proportion is very different in rich from what it is in poor countries. 

Thus, at present, in the opulent countries of Europe, a very large, 
frequently the largest portion of the produce of the land, is destined 
for replacing the capital of the rich and independent farmer; the 
other for paying his profits, and the rent of the landlord. But an- 
ciently, during the prevalency of the feudal government, a very 
small portion of the produce was sufficient to replace the capital 
employed in cultivation. It consisted commonly in a few wretched 
cattle, maintained altogether by the spontaneous produce of uncul- 


Sothe 
propor- ' 
tion of 
produc- 
tive hands 
depends 
on the 
propor- 
tion be- 
tween 
profit 
with rent 
and the 
part of 
produce 
which re- 
places 
capital. 



Rent an- 
ciently 
formed a 
larger 
propor- 
tion of the 
produce 
of agri- 
culture 
than now 


Profits 
were an- 
ciently a 
larger 
share of 
the pro- 
duce of 
manufac- 
tures, 


so the 
propor- 
tion of 
produce 


the wealth of nations 

tivated land, and which might, therefore, be considered as a part 
of that spontaneous produce. It generally too belonged to the land- 
lord, and was by him advanced to the occupiers of the land. All the 
rest of the produce properly belonged to him too, either as rent for 
his land, or as profit upon this paultry capital. The occupiers of 
land were generally bondmen, whose persons and effects were 
equally his property. Those who were not bondmen were tenants at 
will, and though the rent which they paid was often nominally little 
more than a quit-rent, it really amounted to the whole produce of 
the land. Their lord could at all times command their labour in 
peace, and their service in war. Though they lived at a distance 
from his house, they were equally dependent upon him as his re- 
tainers who lived in it. But the whole produce of the land undoubt- 
edly belongs to him, who can dispose of the labour and service of 
all those whom it maintains. In the present state of Europe, the 
share of the landlord seldom exceeds a third, sometimes not a fourth 
part of the whole produce of the land. The rent of land, however, in 
all the improved parts of the country, has been tripled and quad- 
rupled since those ancient times; and this third or fourth part of 
the annual produce is, it seems, three or four times greater than the 
whole had been before. In the progress of improvement, rent, 
though it increases in proportion to the extent, diminishes in pro- 
portion to the produce of the land. 

In the opulent countries of Europe, great capitals are at present 
employed in trade and manufactures. In the ancient state, the lit- 
tle trade that was stirring, and the few homely and coarse manu- 
factures that were carried on, required but very small capitals. 
These, however, must have yielded very large profits. The rate of 
interest was no-where less than ten per cent, and their profits must 
have been sufficient to afford this great interest. At present the rate 
of interest, in the improved parts of Europe, is no-where higher 
than six per cent, and in some of the most improved it is so low as 
four, three, and two per cent. Though that part of the revenue of 
the inhabitants which is derived from the profits of stock is always 
much greater in rich than in poor countries, it is because the stock 
is much greater: in proportion to the stock the profits are generally 
much less.^ 

That part of the annual produce, therefore, which, as soon as it 
comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the productive 
labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, is not only much 

® The question first propounded whether profits form a larger proportion of 
the produce, is wholly lost sight of. With a stock larger in proportion to the 
produce, a lower rate of profit may give a larger proportion of the produce. 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 3 i 9 

greater in rich than in poor countries, but bears a much greater 
proportion to that which is immediately destined for constituting 
a revenue either as rent or as profit. The funds destined for the 
maintenance of productive labour, are not only much greater in 
the former than in the latter, but bear a much greater proportion 
to those which, though they may be employed to maintain either 
productive or unproductive hands, have generally a predilection 
for the latter. 

The proportion between those different funds necessarily deter- 
mines in every country the general character of the inhabitants as 
to industry or idleness. We are more industrious than our forefath- 
ers; because in the present times the funds destined for the main- 
tenance of industry, are much greater in proportion to those which 
are likely to be employed in the maintenance of idleness, than they 
were two or three centuries ago. Our ancestors were idle for want 
of a sufficient encouragement to industry. It is better, says the 
proverb, to play for nothing, than to work for nothing. In mercan- 
tile and manufacturing towns, where the inferior ranks of people 
are chiefly maintained by the employment of capital, they are in 
general industrious, sober, and thriving; as in many English, and 
in most Dutch towns. In those towns which are principally support- 
ed by the constant or occasional residence of a court, and in which 
the inferior ranks of people are chiefly maintained by the spending 
of revenue, they are in general idle, dissolute, and poor; as at 
Rome, Versailles, Compiegne, and Fontainbleau. If you except 
Rouen and Bourdeaux, there is little trade or industry in any of 
the parliament towns of France; ® and the inferior ranks of people, 
being chiefly maintained by the expence of the members of the 
courts of justice, and of those who come to plead before them, are 
in general idle and poor. The great trade of Rouen and Bourdeaux 
seems to be altogether the effect of their situation. Rouen is neces- 
sarily the entrepot of almost all the goods which are brought either 
from foreign countries, or from the maritime provinces of France, 
for the consumption of the great city of Paris. Bourdeaux is in the 
same manner the entrepot of the wines which grow upon the banks 
of the Garonne, and of the rivers which run into it, one of the rich- 
est wine countries in the world, and which seems to produce the 
wine fittest for exportation, or best suited to the taste of foreign 
nations. Such advantageous situations necessarily attract a great 
capital by the great employment which they afford it; and the em- 

^Viz., Paris, Toulouse, Grenoble, Bordeaux, Dijon, Rouen, Aix, Rennes, 
Pau, Metz, Besangon and J>Q\m.--Encyclopedief tom. xii., 1765, s.v. Parle- 
ment. 


required 
for re- 
placing 
capital is 
greater 
than it 
was 


The pro- 
portion 
between 
the funds 
deter- 
mines 
whether 
the in- 
habitants 
of the 
country 
shall be 
industri- 
ous or 
idle. 



Increase 

ordimi- 


320 the wealth of nations 

ployment of this capital is the cause of the industry of those two 
cities. In the other parliament towns of France, very little more 
capital seems to be employed than what is necessary for supplying 
their own consumption; that is, little more than the smallest capi- 
tal which can be employed in them. The same thing may be said of 
Paris, Madrid, and Vienna. Of those three cities, Paris is by far the 
most industrious: but Paris itself is the principal market of all the 
manufactures established at Paris, and its own consumption is the 
principal object of all the trade which it carries on. London, Lis- 
bon, and Copenhagen, are, perhaps, the only three cities in Europe, 
which are both the constant residence of a court, and can at the 
same time be considered as trading cities, or as cities which trade 
not only for their own consumption, but for that of other cities and 
countries. The situation of all the three is extremely advantageous, 
and naturally fits them to be the entrepots of a great part of the 
goods destined for the consumption of distant places. In a city 
where a great revenue is spent, to employ with advantage a capital 
for any other purpose than for supplying the consumption of that 
city, is probably more difficult than in one in which the inferior 
ranks of people have no other maintenance but what they derive 
from the employment of such a capital. The idleness of the greater 
part of the people who are maintained by the expence of revenue, 
corrupts, it is probable, the industry of those who ought to be main- 
tained by the employment of capital, and renders it less advanta- 
geous to employ a capital there than in other places. There was lit- 
tle trade or industry in Edinburgh before the union. When the 
Scotch parliament was no longer to be assembled in it, when it 
ceased to be the necessary residence of the principal nobility and 
gentry of Scotland, it became a city of some trade and industry. It 
still continues, however, to be the residence of the principal courts 
of justice in Scotland, of the boards of customs and excise, &c. A 
considerable revenue, therefore, still continues to be spent in it. In 
trade and industry it is much inferior to Glasgow, of which the in- 
habitants are chiefly maintained by the employment of capital.'^ 
The inhabitants of a large village, it has sometimes been observed, 
after having made considerable progress in manufactures, have be- 
come idle and poor, in consequence of a great lord’s having taken 
up his residence in their neighbourhood. 

The proportion between capital and revenue, therefore, seems 
everywhere to regulate the proportion between industry and idle- 

^ In Lectures, pp. 154-156, the idleness of Edinburgh and such like places 
compared with Glasgow is attributed simply to the want of independence in 
the inhabitants The introduction of revenue and capital is the fruit of study 
of the physiocratic doctrines 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 32 i 

ness. Wherever capital predominates, industry prevails: wherever 
revenue, idleness. Every increase or diminution of capital, there- 
fore, naturally tends to increase or diminish the real quantity of in- 
dustry, the number of productive hands, and consequently the ex- 
changeable value of the annual produce of the land and labour of 
the country, the real wealth and revenue of all its inhabitants. 

Capitals are increased by parsimony, and diminished by prodi- 
gality and misconduct. 

Whatever a person saves from his revenue he adds to his capi- 
tal, and either employs it himself in maintaining an additional 
number of productive hands, or enables some other person to do so, 
by lending it to him for an interest, that is, for a share of the prof- 
its. As the capital of an individual can be increased only by what he 
saves from his annual revenue or his annual gains, so the capital of 
a society, which is the same with tbat of all the individuals who 
compose it, can be increased only in the same manner. 

Parsimony, and not industry, is the immediate cause of the in- 
crease of capital. Industry, indeed, provides the subject which par- 
simony accumulates. But whatever industry might acquire, if par- 
simony did not save and store up, the capital would never be the 
greater. 

Parsimony, by increasing the fund which is destined for the 
maintenance of productive hands, tends to increase the number of 
those hands whose labour adds to the value of the subject upon 
which it is bestowed. It tends therefore to increase the exchange- 
able value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the 
country. It puts into motion an additional quantity of industry, 
which gives an additional value to the annual produce. 

What is annually saved is as regularly consumed as what is an- 
nually spent, and nearly in the same time too; ^ but it is consumed 
by a different set of people. That portion of his revenue which a 
rich man annually spends, is in most cases consumed by idle guests, 
and menial servants, who leave nothing behind them in return for 
their consumption. That portion which he annually saves, as for 
the sake of the profit it is immediately employed as a capital, is 
consumed in the same manner, and nearly in the same time too, 
but by a different set of people, by labourers, manufacturers, and 
artificers, who re-produce with a profit the value of their annual 
consumption. His revenue, we shall suppose, is paid him in money. 
Had he spent the whole, the food, clothing, and lodging, which the 

® This paradox is arrived at through a confusion between the remuneration 
of the labourers who produce the additions to the capital and the additions 
themselves. What is really saved is the additions to the capital, and these are 
not consumed. 


nution of 
the capita 
of a coun- 
try con- 
sequently 
increases 
or dimi- 
nishes its 
annual 
produce. 

Capitals 
are in- 
creased 
by parsi- 
mony or 
saving. 


What is 
saved is 
consumed 
by pro- 
ductive 
hands. 



The frugal 
man es- 
tablishes 
a per- 
petual 
fund for 
the em- 
ployment 
of pro- 
ductive 
hands. 


The 

prodigal 

perverts 

such 

funds to 

other 

uses. 


Whether 
he spends 
on home 
or foreign 
commodi- 
ties makes 
no differ- 
ence. 


322 the wealth of nations 

whole could have purchased, would have been distributed among 
the former set of people. By saving a part of it, as that part is for 
the sake of the profit immediately employed as a capital either by 
himself or by some other person, the food, clothing, and lodging, 
which may be purchased with it, are necessarily reserved for the 
latter. The consumption is the same, but the consumers are differ- 
ent. 

By what a frugal man annually saves, he not only affords main- 
tenance to an additional number of productive hands, for that or 
the ensuing year, but, like the founder of a public workhouse, he 
establishes as it were a perpetual fund for the maintenance of an 
equal number in all times to come. The perpetual allotment and 
destination of this fund, indeed, is not always guarded by any pos- 
itive law, by any trust-right or deed of mortmain. It is always 
guarded, however, by a very powerful principle, the plain and evi- 
dent interest of every individual to whom any share of it shall ever 
belong. No part of it can ever afterwards be employed to maintain 
any but productive hands, without an evident loss to the person 
who thus perverts it from its proper destination. 

The prodigal perverts it in this manner. By not confining his ex- 
pence within his income, he encroaches upon his capital. Like him 
who perverts the revenues of some pious foundation to profane 
purposes, he pays the wages of idleness with those funds which the 
frugality of his forefathers had, as it were, consecrated to the 
maintenance of industry. By diminishing the funds destined for 
the employment of productive labour, he necessarily diminishes, so 
far as it ^ depends upon him, the quantity of that labour which 
adds a value to the subject upon which it is bestowed, and, conse- 
quently, the value of the annual produce of the land and labour of 
the whole country, the real wealth and revenue of its inhabitants. 
If the prodigality of some was not compensated by the frugality of 
others, the conduct of every prodigal, by feeding the idle with the 
bread of the industrious, tends not only to beggar himself, but to 
impoverish his country. 

Though the expence of the prodigal should be altogether in 
home-made, and no part of it in foreign commodities, its effect up- 
on the productive funds of the society would still be the same. Ev- 
ery year there would still be a certain quantity of food and cloth- 
ing, which ought to have maintained productive, employed in 
maintaining unproductive hands. Every year, therefore, there 
would still be some diminution in what would otherwise have been 


^ Ed. I does not contain “it.’ 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 3^3 

the value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the coun- 
try. 

This expence, it may be said indeed, not being in foreign goods, 
and not occasioning any exportation of gold and silver, the same 
quantity of money would remain in the country as before. But if 
the quantity of food and clothing, which were thus consumed b^ 
unproductive, had been distributed among productive hands, they 
would have re-produced, together with a profit, the full value of 
their consumption. The same quantity of money would in this 
case equally have remained in the country, and there would besides 
have been a reproduction of an equal value of consumable goods. 
There would have been two values instead of one. 

The same quantity of money, besides, cannot long remain in any 
country in which the value of the annual produce diminishes. The 
sole use of money is to circulate consumable goods. By means of it, 
provisions, materials, and finished work, are bought and sold, and 
distributed to their proper consumers. The quantity of money, 
therefore, which can be annually employed in any country, must be 
determined by the value of the consumable goods annually circu- 
lated within it. These must consist either in the immediate produce 
of the land and labour of the country itself, or in something which 
had been purchased with some part of that produce. Their value, 
therefore, must diminish as the value of that produce diminishes, 
and along with it the quantity of money which can be employed in 
circulating them. But the money which by this annual diminution 
of produce is annually thrown out of domestic circulation, will not 
be allowed to lie idle. The interest of whoever possesses it, requires 
that it should be employed. But having no employment at home, it 
will, in spite of all laws and prohibitions, be sent abroad, and em- 
ployed in purchasing consumable goods which may be of some use 
at home. Its annual exportation will in this manner continue for 
some time to add something to the annual consumption of the 
country beyond the value of its own annual produce. What in the 
days of its prosperity had been saved from that annual produce, 
and employed in purchasing gold and silver, will contribute for 
some little time to support its consumption in adversity. The ex- 
portation of gold and silver is, in this case, not the cause, but the 
effect of its declension, and may even, for some little time, alleviate 
the misery of that declension. 

The quantity of money, on the contrary, must in every country 
naturally increase as the value of the annual produce increases. 
The value of the consumable goods annually circulated within the 


If he had 
not spent 
there 
would 
have been 
just as 
much 
money in 
the coun- 
try and 
the goods 
produced 
by pro- 
ductive 
hands as 
well. 

Besides, 
when the 
annual 
produce 
dimin- 
ishes, 
money 
will go 
abroad; 


and on 
the other 
hand 



money 
will come 
in when 
the an- 
nual pro- 
duce in- 
creases. 


So even if 
the real 
wealth of 
a country 
consisted 
of its 
money, 
the prodi- 
gal would 
be a pub- 
lic enemy. 


Injudi- 
cious em- 
ployment 
of capital 
has the 
same ef- 
fect as 
prodigal- 
ity. 

Frugality 
and pru- 
dence pre- 
dominate. 


Prodigal- 
ity is 
more in- 
termittent 
than the 
desire to 
better our 
condition. 


324 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

society being greater, will require a greater quantity of money to 
circulate them. A part of the increased produce, therefore, will nat- 
urally be employed in purchasing, wherever it is to be had, the ad- 
ditional quantity of gold and silver necessary for circulating the 
rest. The increase of those metals will in this case be the effect, not 
tie cause, of the public prosperity. Gold and silver are purchased 
every-where in the same manner. The food, clothing, and lodging, 
the revenue and maintenance of all those whose labour or stock is 
employed in bringing them from the mine to the market, is the 
price paid for them in Peru as well as in England. The country 
which has this price to pay, will never be long without the quantity 
of those metals which it has occasion for; and no country will ever 
long retain a quantity which it has no occasion for. 

Whatever, therefore, we may imagine the real wealth and reve- 
nue of a country to consist in, whether in the value of the annual 
produce of its land and labour, as plain reason seems to dictate; or 
in the quantity of the precious metals which circulate within it, as 
vulgar prejudices suppose; in either view of the matter, every 
prodigal appears to be a public enemy, and every frugal man a 
public benefactor. 

The effects of misconduct are often the same as those of prodi- 
gality. Every injudicious and unsuccessful project in agriculture, 
mines, fisheries, trade, or manufactures, tends in the same manner 
to diminish the funds destined for the maintenance of productive 
labour. In every such project, though the capital is consumed by 
productive hands only, yet, as by the injudicious manner in which 
they are employed, they do not reproduce the full value of their 
consumption, there must always be some diminution in what would 
otherwise have been the productive funds of the society. 

It can seldom happen, indeed, that the circumstances of a great 
nation can be much affected either by the prodigality or miscon- 
duct of individuals; the profusion or imprudence of some, being 
always more than compensated by the frugality and good conduct 
of others. 

With regard to profusion, the principle which prompts to ex- 
pence, is the passion for present enjoyment; which, though some- 
times violent and very difficult to be restrained, is in general only 
momentary and occasional. But the principle which prompts to 
save, is the desire of bettering our condition, a desire which, though 
generally calm and dispassionate, comes with us from the womb, 
and never leaves us till we go into the grave. In the whole interval 
which separates those two moments, there is scarce perhaps a single 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 325 

instant in which any man is so perfectly and completely satisfied 
with his situation, as to be without any wish of alteration or im- 
provement of any kind. An augmentation of fortune is the means 
by which the greater part of men propose and wish to better their 
condition. It is the means the most vulgar and the most obvious; 
and the most likely way of augmenting their fortune, is to save and 
accumulate some part of what they acquire, either regularly and 
annually, or upon some extraordinary occasions. Though the prin- 
ciple of expence, therefore, prevails in almost all men upon some 
occasions, and in some men upon almost all occasions, yet in the 
greater part of men, taking the whole course of their life at an av- 
erage, the principle of frugality seems not only to predominate, but 
to predominate very greatly. 

With regard to misconduct, the number of prudent and success- 
ful undertakings is every-where much greater than that of injudi- 
cious and unsuccessful ones. After all our complaints of the fre- 
quency of bankruptcies, the unhappy men who fall into this mis- 
fortune make but a very small part of the whole number engaged 
in trade, and all other sorts of business; not much more perhaps 
than one in a thousand. Bankruptcy is perhaps the greatest and 
most humiliating calamity which can befal an innocent man. The 
greater part of men, therefore, are sufficiently careful to avoid it. 
Some, indeed, do not avoid it; as some do not avoid the gallows. 

Great nations are never impoverished by private, though they 
sometimes are by public prodigality and misconduct. The whole, 
or almost the whole public revenue, is in most countries employed 
in maintaining unproductive hands. Such are the people who com- 
pose a numerous and splendid court, a great ecclesiastical estab- 
lishment, great fleets and armies, who in time of peace produce 
nothing, and in time of war acquire nothing which can compensate 
the expence of maintaining them, even while the war lasts. Such 
people, as they themselves produce nothing, are all maintained by 
the produce of other men’s labour. When multiplied, therefore, to 
an unnecessary number, they may m a particular year consume so 
great a share of this produce, as not'to leave a sufficiency for main- 
taining the productive labourers, who should reproduce it next 
year. The next year’s produce, therefore, will be less than that of 
the foregoing, and if the same disorder should continue, that of the 
third year will be still less than that of the second. Those unpro- 
ductive hands, who should be maintained by a part only of the 

Misprinted “instance” in ed. 5 , and consequently in some modern editions. 

^ “Impoverished” is here equivalent to “made poor,” i.e., ruined, not mere- 
ly to “made poorer,” 


Impru- 
dent un- 
dertakings 
are smaK 
in number 
compared 
to pru- 
dent ones. 


Public 
prodigal- 
ity and 
impru- 
dence are 
more to 
be feared 
than pri- 
vate, 



but are 
counter- 
acted by 
private 
frugaHty 
and pru- 
dence. 


To in- 
crease 
the pro- 
duce of a 
nation an 
increase of 
capital is 
necessary. 


If, there- 
fore the 
produce 
has in- 
creased, 
we may 
be sure 
the capi- 
tal has 
increased. 


326 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

spare revenue of the people, may consume so great a share of their 
whole revenue, and therefore oblige so great a number to encroach 
upon their capitals, upon the funds destined for the maintenance 
of productive labour, that all the frugality and good conduct of in- 
dividuals may not be able to compensate the waste and degradation 
of produce occasioned by this violent and forced encroachment. 

This frugality and good conduct, however, is upon most occa- 
sions, it appears from experience, sufficient to compensate, not on- 
ly the private prodigality and misconduct of individuals, but the 
public extravagance of government. The uniform, constant, and un- 
interrupted effort of every man to better his condition, the princi- 
ple from which public and national, as well as private opulence is 
originally derived, is frequently powerful enough to maintain the 
natural progress of things toward improvement, in spite both of the 
extravagance of government, and of the greatest errors of adminis- 
tration. Like the unknown principle of animal life, it frequently 
restores health and vigour to the constitution, in spite, not only of 
the disease, but of the absurd prescriptions of the doctor. 

The annual produce of the land and labour of any nation can be 
increased in its value by no other means, but by increasing either 
the number of its productive labourers, or the productive powers of 
those labourers who had before been employed. The number of its 
productive labourers, it is evident, can never be much increased, 
but in consequence of an increase of capital, or of the funds des- 
tined for maintaining them. The productive powers of the same 
number of labourers cannot be increased, but in consequence either 
of some addition and improvement to those machines and instru- 
ments which facilitate and abridge labour; or of a more proper di- 
vision and distribution of employment. In either case an additional 
capital is almost always required. It is by means of an additional 
capital only, that the undertaker of any work can either provide 
his workmen with better machinery, or make a more proper distri- 
bution of employment among them. When the work to be done con- 
sists of a number of parts, to keep every man constantly employed 
in one way, requires a much greater capital than where every man 
is occasionally employed in every different part of the work. When 
we compare, therefore, the state of a nation at two different pe- 
riods, and find, that the annual produce of its land and labour is ev- 
idently greater at the latter than at the former, that its lands are 
better cultivated, its manufactures more numerous and more flour- 
ishing, and its trade more extensive, we may be assured that its cap- 
ital must have increased during the interval between those two pe- 
riods, and that more must have been added to it by the good con- 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 327 

duct of some, than had been taken from it either by the private 
misconduct of others, or by the public extravagance of government. 
But we shall find this to have been the case of almost all nations, 
in all tolerably quiet and peaceful times, even of those who have 
not enjoyed the most prudent and parsimonious governments. To 
form a right judgment of it, indeed, we must compare the state of 
the country at periods somewhat distant from one another. The 
progress is frequently so gradual, that, at near periods, the im- 
provement is not only not sensible, but from the declension either 
of certain branches of industry, or of certain districts of the coun- 
try, things which sometimes happen though the country in general 
be in great prosperity, there frequently arises a suspicion, that 
the riches and industry of the whole are decaying. 

The annual produce of the land and labour of England, for ex- 
ample, is certainly much greater than it was, a little more than a 
century ago, at the restoration of Charles II. Though, at present, 
few people, I believe, doubt of this, yet during this period, five 
years have seldom passed away in which some book or pamphlet 
has not been published, written too with such abilities as to gain 
some authority with the public, and pretending to demonstrate 
that the wealth of the nation was fast declining, that the country 
was depopulated, agriculture neglected, manufactures decaying, 
and trade undone. Nor have these publications been all party 
pamphlets, the wretched offspring of falsehood and venality. Many 
of them have been written by very candid and very intelligent peo- 
ple; who wrote nothing but what they believed, and for no other 
reason but because they believed it. 

The annual produce of the land and labour of England again, 
was certainly much greater at the restoration, than we can suppose 
it to have been about an hundred years before, at the accession of 
Elizabeth. At this period too, we have all reason to believe, the 
country was much more advanced in improvement, than it had 
been about a century before, towards the close of the dissensions 
between the houses of York and Lancaster. Even then it was, prob- 
ably, in a better condition than it had been at the Norman con- 
quest, and at the Norman conquest, than during the confusion of 
the Saxon Heptarchy. Even at this early period, it was certainly a 
more improved country than at the invasion of Julius Caesar, when 
its inhabitants were nearly in the same state with the savages in 
North America. 

In each of those periods, however, there was, not only much pri- 
vate and public profusion, many expensive and unnecessary wars. 


This has 
been the 
case of al- 
most all 
nations in 
peaceable 
times. 


England 
for ex- 
ample 
from 1660 
to 1776, 


or from 
1558 to 
1660, 


though 
there was 


“Ed. I reads “is.” 



much 
public and 
private 
profusion, 
and many 
other dis- 
orders 
and mis- 
fortunes 
occurred. 


Private 
frugality 
and pru- 
dence 
have si- 
lently 
counter- 
acted 
these cir- 
cum- 
stances. 


328 the wealth of nations 

great perversion of the annual produce from maintaining produc- 
tive to maintain unproductive hands; but sometimes, in the confu- 
sion of civil discord, such absolute waste and destruction of stock, 
as might be supposed, not only to retard, as it certainly did, the 
natural accumulation of riches, but to have left the country, at the 
end of the period, poorer than at the beginning. Thus, in the happi- 
est and most fortunate period of them all, that which has passed 
since the restoration, how many disorders and misfortunes have oc- 
curred, which, could they have been foreseen, not only the impov- 
erishment, but the total ruin of the country would have been ex- 
pected from them? The fire and the plague of London, the two 
Dutch wars, the disorders of the revolution, the war in Ireland, the 
four expensive French wars of 1688, 1702,^® 1742, and 1756, to- 
gether with the two rebellions of 1715 and 1745. In the course of 
the four French wars, the nation has contracted more than a hun- 
dred and forty-five millions of debt, over and above all the other 
extraordinary annual expence which they occasioned, so that the 
whole cannot be computed at less than two hundred millions. So 
great a share of the annual produce of the land and labour of the 
country, has, since the revolution, been employed upon different 
occasions, in maintaining an extraordinary number of unproduc- 
tive hands. But had not those wars given this particular direction 
to so large a capital, the greater part of it would naturally have 
been employed in maintaining productive hands, whose labour 
would have replaced, with a profit, the whole value of their con- 
sumption. The value of the annual produce of the land and labour 
of the country, would have been considerably increased by it every 
year, and every year’s increase would have augmented still more 
that of the following year.^^ More houses would have been built, 
more lands would have been improved, and those which had been 
improved before would have been better cultivated, more manu- 
factures would have been established, and those which had been 
established before would have been more extended; and to what 
height the real wealth and revenue of the country might, by this 
time, have been raised, it is not perhaps very easy even to imagine. 

But though the profusion of government must, undoubtedly, 
have retarded the natural progress of England towards wealth and 
improvement, it has not been able to stop it. The annual produce 
of its land and labour is, undoubtedly, much greater at present than 
it was either at the restoration or at the revolution. The capital, 
therefore, annually employed in cultivating this land, and in main- 
taining this labour, must likewise be much greater. In the midst of 

“Ed. I reads “1701.” “Ed. i reads “the next year” 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 3^9 

all the exactions of government, this capital has been silently and 
gradually accumulated by the private frugality and good conduct 
of individuals, by their universal, continual, and uninterrupted ef- 
fort to better their own condition. It is this effort, protected by law 
and allowed by liberty to exert itself in the manner that is most ad- 
vantageous, which has maintained the progress of England towards 
opulence and improvement in almost all former times, and which, 
it is to be hoped, will do so in all future times. England, however, 
as it has never been blessed with a very parsimonious government, 
so parsimony has at no time been the characteristical virtue of its 
inhabitants. It is the highest impertinence and presumption, there- 
fore, in kings and ministers, to pretend to watch over the ceconomy 
of private people, and to restrain their expence, either by sumptu- 
ary laws, or by prohibiting the importation of foreign luxuries. 
They are themselves always, and without any exception, the great- 
est spendthrifts in the society. Let them look well after their own 
expence, and they may safely trust private people with theirs. If 
their own extravagance does not ruin the state, that of their sub- 
jects never will. 

As frugality increases, and prodigality diminishes the public cap- 
ital, so the conduct of those whose expence just equals their reve- 
nue, without either accumulating or encroaching, neither increases 
nor diminishes it. Some modes of expence, however, seem to con- 
tribute more to the growth of public opulence than others. 

The revenue of an individual may be spent, either in things 
which are consumed immediately, and in which one day’s expence 
can neither alleviate nor support that of another; or it may be 
spent in things more durable, which can therefore be accumulated, 
and in which every day’s expence may, as he chuses, either alleviate 
or support and heighten the effect of that of the following day. A 
man of fortune, for example, may either spend his revenue in a pro- 
fuse and sumptuous table, and in maintaining a great number of 
menial servants, and a multitude of dogs and horses; or contenting 
himself with a frugal table and few attendants, he may lay out the 
greater part of it in adorning his house or his country villa, in use- 
ful or ornamental buildings, in useful or ornamental furniture, in 
collecting books, statues, pictures; or in things more frivolous, jew- 
els, baubles, ingenious trinkets of different kinds; or, what is most 
trifling of all, in amassing a great wardrobe of fine clothes, like the 
favourite and minister of a great prince who died a few years ago.^® 

^ As suggested by Germain Garnier’s note on tMs passage (Recherches sur 
la Nature et les Causes de la Richesse des Nations, 1802, tom. ii., p. 346), this 
was doubtless the Count of Bruhl, Minister and Great Chamberlain to the 
King of Poland, who left at his death 365 suits of clothes, all very rich. Jonas 


Apart 
from in- 
crease or 
diminu- 
tion of 
capital 
different 
kinds of 
expense 
maybe 
distin- 
guished. 

An indi- 
vidual 
who 

spends on 
durable 
commodi- 
ties wiU 
be richer 
than one 
who 

spends on 
perish- 
able ones. 



330 the wealth OF NATIONS 

Were two men of equal fortune to spend their revenue, the one 
chiefly in the one way, the other in the other, the magnificence of 
the person whose expence had been chiefly in durable commodities, 
would be continually increasing, every day’s expence contributing 
something to support and heighten the effect of that of the follow- 
ing day: that of the other, on the contrary, would be no greater at 
the end of the period than at the beginning. The former too would, 
at the end of the period, be the richer man of the two. He would 
have a stock of goods of some kind or other, which, though it might 
not be worth all that it cost, would always be worth something. No 
trace or vestige of the expence of the latter would remain, and the 
effects of ten or twenty years profusion would be as completely an- 
nihilated as if they had never existed. 

The same As the one mode of expence is more favourable than the other to 

tr^oU opulence of an individual, so is it likewise to that of a nation. 

nation. The houses, the furniture, the clothing of the rich, in a little time, 
become useful to the inferior and middling ranks of people. They 
are able to purchase then when their superiors grow weary of them, 
and the general accommodation of the whole people is thus gradu- 
ally improved, when this mode of expence becomes universal 
among men of fortune. In countries which have long been rich, you 
will frequently find the inferior ranks of people in possession both 
of houses and furniture perfectly good and entire, but of which nei- 
ther the one could have been built, nor the other have been made 
for their use. What was formerly a seat of the family of Seymour, 
is now an inn upon the Bath road.^® The marriage-bed of James 
the First of Great Britain, which his Queen brought with her from 
Denmark, as a present fit for a sovereign to make to a sovereign, 
was, a few years ago, the ornament of an ale-house at Dunferm- 
line.^^ In some ancient cities, which either have been long station- 
ary, or have gone somewhat to decay, you will sometimes scarce 
find a single house which could have been built for its present in- 

Hanway (Historical Account of the British Trade over the Caspian Sea, with 
a Journal of Travels from London through Russia into Persia, and back 
through Russia, Germany and Holland, 1753, voL ii, p. 230) says this count 
had 300 or 400 suits of rich clothes, and had “collected all the finest colours 
of all the ^^est cloths, velvets, and silks of all the manufactures, not to men- 
tion the different kinds of lace and embroideries of Europe,” and also pictures 
and books, at Dresden. He died in 1764. 

This was the Castle Inn at Marlborough, which ceased to be an inn and 
became Marlborough College in 1843, thus undergoing another vicissitude 
^ The mnkeeper, Mrs. Walker, a zealous Jacobite, refused an offer of fifty 
guineas for the bed, but presented it about 1764 to the Earl of Elgin (John 
Fernie, History of the Town and Parish of Dunfermline, 1815, P* 7i)) and its 
f^Xe"°^ ^ mantel-piece in the dining-room at Broomhall, near Dun- 



ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL 33^ 

habitants. If you go into those houses too, you will frequently find 
many excellent, though antiquated pieces of furniture, which are 
still very fit for use, and which could as little have been made for 
them. Noble palaces, magnificent villas, great collections of books, 
statues, pictures, and other curiosities, are frequently both an orna- 
ment and an honour, not only to the neighbourhood, but to the 
whole country to which they belong. Versailles is an ornament and 
an honour to France, Stowe and Wilton to England. Italy still con- 
tinues to command some sort of veneration by the number of mon- 
uments of this kind which it possesses, though the wealth which 
produced them has decayed, and though^® the genius which 
planned them seems to be extinguished, perhaps from not having 
the same emplo3rment. 

The expence too, which is laid out in durable commodities, is fav- The for- 
ourable, not only to accumulation, but to frugality. If a person 
should at any time exceed in it, he can easily reform without ex- eSSto 

posing himself to the censure of the public. To reduce very much bring to 

the number of his servants, to reform his table from great profusion ^ 
to great frugality, to lay down his equipage after he has once set it 
up, are changes which cannot escape the observation of his neigh- 
bours, and which are supposed to imply some acknowledgment of 
preceding bad conduct. Few, therefore, of those who have once 
been so unfortunate as to launch out too far into this sort of ex- 
pence, have afterwards the courage to reform, till ruin and bank- 
ruptcy oblige them. But if a person has, at any time, been at too 
great an expence in building, in furniture, in books or pictures, no 
imprudence can be inferred from his changing his conduct. These 
are things in which further expence is frequently rendered unnec- 
essary by former expence; and when a person stops short, he ap- 
pears to do so, not because he has exceeded his fortune, but be- 
cause he has satisfied his fancy. 

The expence, besides, that is laid out in durable commodities, and gives 
gives maintenance, commonly, to a greater number of people, than 
that which is employed in the most profuse hospitality. Of two or j^ore 
three hundred weight of provisions, which may some’times be served people, 
up at a great festival, one-half, perhaps, is thrown to the dunghill, 
and there is always a great deal wasted and abused. But if the ex- 
pence of this entertainment had been employed in setting to work 
masons, carpenters, upholsterers, mechanics, &c.^® a quantity of 
provisions, of equal value, would have been distributed among a 
still greater number of people, who would have bought them in 
penny-worths and pound weights, and not have lost or thrown 


^ Ed I does not contain “though.’ 


Ed. I does not contain “&c.’ 



It does 
not fol- 
low that 
it beto- 
kens a 
more gen- 
erous 
spint 


332 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

away a single ounce of them. In the one way, besides, this expence 
maintains productive, in the other unproductive hands. In the one 
way, therefore, it increases, in the other, it does not increase, the 
exchangeable value of the annual produce of the land and labour 
of the country. 

I would not, however, by all this be understood to mean, that 
the one species of expence always betokens a more liberal or gener- 
ous spirit than the other When a man of fortune spends his rev- 
enue chiefly in hospitality, he shares the greater part of it with 
his friends and companions, but when he employs it m purchasing 
such durable commodities, he often spends the whole upon his own 
person, and gives nothing to any body without an equivalent. The 
latter species of expence, therefore, especially when directed to- 
wards frivolous objects, the little ornaments of dress and furniture, 
jewels, trinkets, gewgaws, frequently indicates, not only a trifling, 
but a base and selfish disposition. All that I mean is, that the one 
sort of expence, as it always occasions some accumulation of valu- 
able commodities, as it is more favourable to private frugality, 
and, consequently, to the increase of the public capital, and as it 
maintains productive, rather than unproductive hands, conduces 
more than the other to the grovrth of public opulence. 


♦ 



CHAPTER IV 


OF STOCK LENT AT INTEREST 

The stock which is lent at interest is always considered as a cap- 
ital by the lender. He expects that in due time it is to be restored 
to him, and that in the mean time the borrower is to pay him a 
certain annual rent for the use of it. The borrower may use it 
either as a capital, or as a stock reserved for immediate consump- 
tion. If he uses it as a capital, he employs it in the maintenance of 
productive labourers, who reproduce the value with a profit. He 
can, in this case, both restore the capital and pay the interest 
without alienating or encroaching upon any other source of rev- 
enue. If he uses it as a stock reserved for immediate consumption, 
he acts the part of a prodigal, and dissipates in the maintenance 
of the idle, what was destined for the support of the industrious. 
He can, in this case, neither restore the capital nor pay the inter- 
est, without either alienating or encroaching upon some other 
source of revenue, such as the property or the rent of land. 

The stock which is lent at interest is, no doubt, occasionally 
employed in both these ways, but in the former much more fre- 
quently than in the latter. The man who borrows in order to spend 
will soon be ruined, and he who lends to him will generally have 
occasion to repent of his folly. To borrow or to lend for such a 
purpose, therefore, is in all cases, where gross usury is out of the 
question, contrary to the interest of both parties; and though it 
no doubt happens sometimes that people do both the one and the 
other; yet, from the regard that all men have for their own inter- 
est, we may be assured, that it cannot happen so very frequently 
as we are sometimes apt to imagine. Ask any rich man of common 
prudence, to which of the two sorts of people he has lent the 
greater part of his stock, to those who, he thinks, will employ it 
profitably, or to those who will spend it idly, and he will, laugh at 
you for proposing the question. Even among borrowers, therefore, 
not the people in the world most famous for frugality, the num- 
ber of the frugal and industrious surpasses considerably that of 
the prodigal and idle. 


Stock lent 
at interest 
is a capi- 
tal to the 
lender, 
but may 
or may 
not be so 
to the 
borrower 


Generally 
it is so to 
the bor- 
rower, 


333 



334 


except in 
case of 
mortgages 
effected 
by coun- 
try gentle- 
men. 


Loans are 
made in 
money, 
but what 
the bor- 
rower 
wants and 
gets is 
goods. 


So the 
quantity 
of stock 
which can 
be lent is 
deter- 
mined by 
the value 
of that 
part of 
the pro- 
duce 

which re- 
places 
such capi- 
tal as the 
owner 
does not 

himgplf 

employ. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

The only people to whom stdtk is commonly lent, without their 
being expected to make any very profitable use of it, are country 
gentlemen who borrow upon mortgage. Even they scarce ever bor- 
row merely to spend. What they borrow, one may say, is com- 
monly spent before they borrow it. They have generally consumed 
so great a quantity of goods, advanced to them upon credit by 
shopkeepers and tradesmen, that they find it necessary to borrow 
at interest in order to pay the debt. The capital borrowed replaces 
the capitals of those shopkeepers and tradesmen, which the coun- 
try gentlemen could not have replaced from the rents of their es- 
tates. It is not properly borrowed in order to be spent, but in 
order to replace a capital which had been spent before. 

Almost all loans at interest are made in money, either of paper, 
or of gold and silver. But what the borrower really wants, and 
what the lender really supplies him with, is not the money, but 
the money^s worth, or the goods which it can purchase. If he wants 
it as a stock for immediate consumption, it is those goods only 
which he can place in that stock. If he wants it as a capital for 
employing industry, it is from those goods only that the industri- 
ous can be furnished with the tools, materials, and maintenance, 
necessary for carrying on their work. By means of the loan, the 
lender, as it were, assigns to the borrower his right to a certain 
portion of the annual produce of the land and labour of the coun- 
try, to be employed as the borrower pleases.^ 

The quantity of stock, therefore, or, as it is commonly ex- 
pressed, of money which can be lent at interest in any country, is 
not regulated by the value of the money, whether paper or coin, 
which serves as the instrument of the different loans made in that 
country, but by the value of that part of the annual produce 
which, as soon as it comes either from the ground, or from the 
hands of the productive labourers, is destined not only for replac- 
ing a capital, but such a capital as the owner does not care to be at 
the trouble of employing himself. As such capitals are commonly 
lent out and paid back in money, they constitute what is called 
the monied interest. It is distinct, not only from the landed, but 
from the trading and manufacturing interests, as in these last the 
owners themselves employ their own capitals. Even in the monied 
interest, however, the money is, as it were, but the deed of assign- 
ment, which conveys from one hand to another those capitals 
which the owners do not care to employ themselves. Those capi- 
tals may be greater in almost any proportion, than the amount of 

^Lectures, p. 220. 



STOCK LENT AT INTEREST 


335 


the money which serves as the instrument of their conveyance; 
the same pieces of money successively serving for many different 
loans, as well as for many different purchases. A, for example, 
lends to W a thousand pounds, with which W immediately pur- 
chases of B a thousand pounds worth of goods. B having no oc- 
casion for the money himself, lends the identical pieces to X, with 
which X immediately purchases of C another thousand pounds 
worth of goods. C in the same manner, and for the same reason, 
lends them to Y, who again purchases goods with them of D. In 
this manner the same pieces, either of coin or of paper, may, in the 
course of a few days, serve as the instrument of three different 
loans, and of three different purchases, each of which is, in value, 
equal to the whole amount of those pieces. What the three monied 
men A, B, and C, assign to the three borrowers, W, X, Y, is the 
power of making those purchases. In this power consist both the 
value and the use of the loans. The stock lent by the three monied 
men, is equal to the value of the goods which can be purchased 
with it, and is three times greater than that of the money with 
which the purchases are made. Those loans, however, may be all 
perfectly well secured, the goods purchased by the different debt- 
ors being so employed, as, in due time, to bring back, with a profit, 
an equal value either of coin or of paper. And as the same pieces 
of money can thus serve as the instrument of different loans to 
three, or for the same reason, to thirty times their value, so they 
may likewise successively serve as the instrument of repa)mient. 

A capital lent at interest may, in this manner, be considered as 
an assignment from the lender to the borrower of a certain con- 
siderable portion of the annual produce; upon condition that the 
borrower in return shall, during the continuance of the loan, an- 
nually assign to the lender a smaller portion, called the interest , 
and at the end of it, a portion equally considerable with that 
which had originally been assigned to him, called the repayment. 
Though money, either coin or paper, serves generally as the deed 
of assignment both to the smaller, and to the more considerable 
portion, it is itself altogether different from what is assigned by it. 

In proportion as that share of the annual produce which, as 
soon as it comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the 
productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, increases 
in any country, what is called the monied interest naturally in- 
creases with it. The increase of those particular capitals from 
which the owners wish to derive a revenue, without being at the 
trouble of employing them themselves, naturally accompanies the 


This may 

be much 

greater 

than the 

actual 

money 

employed. 


The 

money is 
altogether 
different 
from 
what is 
actually 
assigned 
either as 
principal 
or inter- 
est. 


The stock 
to be lent 
at interest 
naturally 
grows as 
the whole 
quantity 
of stock 
increases. 



Interest 
falls as 
the quan- 
tity of 
stock to 
be lent 
increases 

because 
profits di- 
minish as 
it becomes 
more dif- 
ficult to 
find a 
profitable 
method 
of em- 
ploying 
new capi- 
tal. 


The no- 
tion that 
it was the 
discovery 
of the 
West 
Indies 
which 
lowered 
interest 
has been 


336 the wealth oe nations 

general increase of capitals; or, in other words, as stock increases, 
the quantity of stock to be lent at interest grows gradually greater 
and greater. 

As the quantity of stock to be lent at interest increases, the in- 
terest, or the price which must be paid for the use of that stock, 
necessarily diminishes, not only from those general causes which 
make the market price of things commonly diminish as their quan- 
tity increases, but from other causes which are peculiar to this 
particular case. As capitals increase in any country, the profits 
which can be made by employing them necessarily diminish. It 
becomes gradually more and more difficult to find within the coun- 
try a profitable method of employing any new capital. There arises 
in consequence a competition between different capitals, the owner 
of one endeavouring to get possession of that employment which 
is occupied by another. But upon most occasions he can hope to 
justle that other out of this employment, by no other means but 
by dealing upon more reasonable terms. He must not only sell 
what he deals in somewhat cheaper, but in order to get it to sell, 
he must sometimes too buy it dearer. The demand for productive 
labour, by the increase of the funds which are destined for main- 
taining it, grows every day greater and greater. Labourers easily 
find employment, but the owners of capitals find it difficult to get 
labourers to employ. Their competition raises the wages of labour, 
and sinks the profits of stock. But when the profits which can be 
made by the use of a capital are in this manner diminished, as it 
were, at both ends, the price which can be paid for the use of it, 
that is, the rate of interest, must necessarily be diminished with 
them. 

Mr. Locke, Mr. Law, and Mr. Montesquieu, as well as many 
other writers,^ seem to have imagined that the increase of the 
quantity of gold and silver, in consequence of the discovery of the 
Spanish West Indies, was tie real cause of the lowering of the rate 
of interest through the greater part of Europe. Those metals, they 
say, having become of less value themselves, the use of any par- 
ticular portion of them necessarily became of less value too, and 
consequently the price which could be paid for it. This notion, 

® Locke, Some ConsiderationSf ed. of 1696, pp. 6, 10, ii, 81; Law, Money 
and Trade, 2nd ed., 1720, p. 17 ; Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois, liv. xxii., ch. vi 
Locke and Law suppose that the rate rises and falls with the quantity of 
money, and Montesquieu specifically attributes the historical fall to the dis- 
covery of the American mines. Cantillon disapproves of the common and re- 
ceived idea that an increase of effective money diminishes the rate of interest. 
-—Essai, pp. 282-285; see Lectures, pp. 219, 220. 



STOCK LENT AT INTEREST 337 

which at first sight seems so plausible, has been so fully exposed 
by Mr. Hume,^ that it is, perhaps, unnecessary to say anything 
more about it. The following very short and plain argument, how- 
ever, may serve to explain more distinctly the fallacy which seems 
to have misled those gentlemen. 

Before the discovery of the Spanish West Indies, ten per cent, 
seems to have been the common rate of interest through the great- 
er part of Europe. It has since that time in different countries 
sunk to six, five, four, and three per cent. Let us suppose that in 
every particular country the value of silver has sunk precisely in 
the same proportion as the rate of interest; and that in those 
countries, for example, where interest has been reduced from ten 
to five per cent., the same quantity of silver can now purchase 
just half the quantity of goods which it could have purchased 
before. This supposition will not, I believe, be found any-where 
agreeable to the truth; but it is the most favourable to the opinion 
which we are going to examine; and even upon this supposition 
it is utterly impossible that the lowering of the value of silver 
could have the smallest tendency to lower the rate of interest. If 
a hundred pounds are in those countries now of no more value 
than fifty pounds were then, ten pounds must now be of no more 
value than five pounds were then. Whatever were the causes which 
lowered the value of the capital, the same must necessarily have 
lowered that of the interest, and exactly in the same proportion. 
The proportion between the value of the capital and that of the 
interest, must have remained the same, though the rate had never 
been altered. By altering the rate, on the contrary, the proportion 
between those two values is necessarily altered. If a hundred 
pounds now are worth no more than fifty were then, five pounds 
now can be worth no more than two pounds ten shillings were 
then. By reducing the rate of interest, therefore, from ten to five 
per cent., we give for the use of a capital, which is supposed to 
be equal to one-half of its former value, an interest which is equal 
to one-fourth only of the value of the former interest. 

Any increase in the quantity of silver, while that of the com- 
modities circulated by means of it remained the same, could have 
no other effect than to diminish the value of that metal. The 
nominal value of all sorts of goods would be greater, but their 
real value would be precisely the same as before. They would 
be exchanged for a greater number of pieces of silver; but the 
quantity of labour which they could command, the number of 
people whom they could maintain and employ, would be precisely 

® In his essay, “Of Interest,” in Political Discourses, 1752. 


refuted 
by Hume. 


If iioo 
are now 
required 
to pur- 
chase 
whati^o 
would 
have pur- 
chased 
then,iio 
must now 
be re- 
quired to 
purchase 
what £$ 
would 
have pur- 
chased 
then. 


An in- 
crease in 
the quan- 
tity of 
silver 
could only 
diminish 
its value. 



Nominal 
wages 
would be 
greater, 
but real 
wages the 
same; 
profits 
would be 
the same 
nominally 
and 
really 


An in- 
crease in 
the goods 
annually 
circulated 
would 
cause a 
faUof 
profits 
and con- 
sequently 
of inter- 
est 


338 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the same. The capital of the country would be the same, though 
a greater number of pieces might be requisite for conveying any 
equal portion of it from one hand to another. The deeds of as- 
signment, like the conveyances of a verbose attorney, would be 
more cumbersome, but the thing assigned would be precisely the 
same as before, and could produce only the same effects. The 
funds for maintaining productive labour being the same, the de- 
mand for it would be the same. Its price or wages, therefore, 
though nominally greater, would really be the same. They would 
be paid in a greater number of pieces of silver; but they would 
purchase only the same quantity of goods. The profits of stock 
would be the same both nominally and really. The wages of labour 
are commonly computed by the quantity of silver which is paid 
to the labourer. When that is increased, therefore, his wages appear 
to be increased, though they may sometimes be no greater than be- 
fore. But the profits of stock are not computed by the number of 
pieces of silver with which they are paid, but by the proportion 
which those pieces bear to the whole capital employed. Thus in a 
particular country five shillings a week are said to be the common 
wages of labour, and ten per cent, the common profits of stock. But 
the whole capital of the country being the same as before, the com- 
petition between the different capitals of individuals into which it 
was divided would likewise be the same. They would all trade with 
the same advantages and disadvantages. The common proportion 
between capital and profit, therefore, would be the same, and con- 
sequently the common interest of money; what can commonly be 
given for the use of money being necessarily regulated by what can 
commonly be made by the use of it. 

Any increase in the quantity of commodities annually circulated 
within the country, while that of the money which circulated them 
remained the same, would, on the contrary, produce many other im- 
portant effects, besides that of raising the value of the money. The 
capital of the country, though it might nominally be the same, 
would really be augmented. It might continue to be expressed by 
the same quantity of money, but it would command a greater quan- 
tity of labour. The quantity of productive labour which it could 
maintain and employ would be increased, and consequently the de- 
mand for that labour. Its wages would naturally rise with the de- 
mand, and yet might appear to sink. They might be paid with a 
smaller quantity of money, but that smaller quantity might pur- 
chase a greater quantity of goods than a greater had done before. 
The profits of stock would be diminished both really and in appear- 
ance. The whole capital of the country being augmented, the com- 



STOCK LENT AT INTEREST 339 

petition between the different capitals of which it was composed, 
would naturally be augmented along with it. The owners of those '* 
particular capitals would be obliged to content themselves with a 
smaller proportion of the produce of that labour which their respec- 
tive capitals employed. The interest of money, keeping pace always 
with the profits of stock, might, in this manner, be greatly diminish- 
ed, though the value of money, or the quantity of goods which any 
particular sum could purchase, was greatly augmented. 

In some countries the interest of money has been prohibited by 
law. But as something can every-where be made by the use of 
money, something ought every-where to be paid for the use of it. 
This regulation, instead of preventing, has been found from experi- 
ence to increase the evil of usury; the debtor being obliged to pay, 
not only for the use of the money, but for the risk which his creditor 
runs by accepting a compensation for that use. He is obliged, if one 
may say so, to insure his creditor from the penalties of usury. 

In countries where interest is permitted, the law, in order to pre- 
vent the extortion of usury, generally ixes the highest rate which 
can be taken without incurring a pendty. This rate ought always to 
be somewhat above the lowest market price, or the price which is 
commonly paid for the use of money by those who can give the most 
undoubted security. If this legal rate should be fixed below the low- 
est market rate, the effects of this fixation must be nearly the same 
as those of a total prohibition of interest. The creditor will not lend 
his money for less than the use of it is worth, and the debtor must 
pay him for the risk which he runs by accepting the full value of 
that use. If it is fixed precisely at the lowest market price, it ruins 
with honest people, who respect the laws of their country, the credit 
of all those who cannot give the very best security, and obliges them 
to have recourse to exorbitant usurers. In a country, such as Great 
Britain, where money is lent to government at three per cent, and 
to private people upon good security at four, and four and a half, 
the present legal rate, five per cent., is perhaps, as proper as any. 

The legal rate, it is to be observed, though it ought to be some- 
what above, ought not to be much above the lowest market rate. If 
the legal rate of interest in Great Britain, for example, was fixed so 
high as eight or ten per cent., the greater part of the money which 
was to be lent, would be lent to prodigals and projectors, who alone 
would be willing to give this high interest. Sober people, who will 
give for the use of money no more than a part of what they are like- 
ly to make by the use of it, would not venture into the competition. 
A great part of the capital of the country would thus be kept out of 
the hands which were most likely to make a profitable and advan- 


The pro- 
hibition 
of interest 
is wrong, 
and in- 
creases the 
evil of 
usury. 


Where k 
maximum 
rate is 
fixed, this 
should be 
somewhat 
above the 
market 
rate on 
good se- 
curity, 


but not 
much 
above, or 
the great- 
er part of 
loans 
would be 
to prodi- 
gals and 
pro- 
jectors 



No law 
can reduce 
interest 
below the 
market 
rate. 


The num- 
ber of 
years’ 
purchase 
commonly 
paid for 
land de- 
pends on 
the rate of 
interest. 


340 the wealth of nations 

tageous use of it, and thrown into those which were most likely to 
waste and destroy it. Where the legal rate of interest, on the con- 
trary, is fixed but a very little above the lowest market rate, sober 
people are universally preferred, as borrowers, to prodigals and pro- 
jectors. The person who lends money gets nearly as much interest 
from the former as he dares to take from the latter, and his money 
is much safer in the hands of the one set of people, than in those of 
the other. A great part of the capital of the country is thus thrown 
into the hands in which it is most likely to be employed with ad- 
vantage. 

No law can reduce the common rate of interest below the lowest 
ordinary market rate at the time when that law is made. Notwith- 
standing the edict of 1766, by which the French king attempted to 
reduce the rate of interest from five to four per cent., money con- 
tinued to be lent in France at five per cent., the law being evaded in 
several different ways.^ 

The ordinary market price of land, it is to be observed, depends 
every-where upon the ordinary market rate of interest.® The person 
who has a capital from which he wishes to derive a revenue, without 
taking the trouble to employ it himself, deliberates whether he 
should buy land with it, or lend it out at interest. The superior se- 
curity of land, together with some other advantages which almost 
every-where attend upon this species of property, will generally dis- 
pose him to content himself with a smaller revenue from land, than 
what he might have by lending out his money at interest. These ad- 
vantages are sufficient to compensate a certain difference of rev- 
enue; but they will compensate a certain difference only; and if the 
rent of land should fall short of the interest of money by a greater 
difference, nobody would buy land, which would §oon reduce its 
ordinary price. On the contrary, if the advantages should much 
more than compensate the difference, every body would buy land, 
which again would soon raise its ordinary price. When interest was 
at ten per cent., land was commonly sold for ten and twelve years 
purchase. As interest sunk to six, five, and four per cent., the price 
of land rose to twenty, five and twenty, and thirty years purchase. 
The market rate of interest is higher in France than in England; 
and the common price of land is lower. In England it commonly 
sells at thirty; in France at twenty years purchase. 

^ Above, p. 91. 

® This seems obvious, but it was distinctly denied by Locke, Some Consid- 
erations, pp. 83, 84. 



CHAPTER V 


OF THE DIFFERENT EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 


Though all capitals are destined for the maintenance of productive 
labour only, yet the quantity of that labour, which equal capitals 
are capable of putting into motion, varies extremely according to 
the diversity of their employment; as does likewise the value which 
that employment adds to the annual produce of the land and labour 
of the country. 

A capital may be employed in four different ways: either, first, in 
procuring the rude produce annually required for the use and con- 
sumption of the society; or, secondly, in manufacturing and pre- 
paring that rude produce for immediate use and consumption; or, 
thirdly, in transporting either the rude or manufactured produce 
from the places where they abound to those where they are wanted ; 
or, lastly, in dividing particular portions of either into such small 
parcels as suit the occasional demands of those who want them. In 
the first way are employed the capitals of all those who undertake 
the improvement or cultivation of lands, mines, or fisheries; in the 
second, those of all master manufacturers; in the third, those of all 
wholesale merchants; and in the fourth, those of all retailers. It is 
difficult to conceive that a capital should be employed in any way 
which may not be classed under some one or other of those four. 

Each of those four methods of employing a capital is essentially 
necessary either to the existence or extension of the other three, or 
to the general conveniency of the society. 

Unless a capital was employed in furnishing rude produce to a 
certain degree of abundance, neither manufactures nor trade of any 
kind could exist. 

Unless a capital was employed in manufacturing that part of the 
rude produce which requires a good deal of preparation before it 
can be fit for use and consumption, it either would never be pro- 
duced, because there could be no demand for it; or if it was pro- 
duced spontaneously, it would be of no value in exchange, and could 
add noiliing to the wealth of the society. 

341 


The 

quantity 
of labour 
put in 
motion 
and the 
value 
added to 
the an- 
nual pro- 
duce by 
capitals 
vary with 
their em- 
ployment. 

There are 
four dif- 
ferent 
ways of 
employing 
capital, 


all of 
which are 
necessary; 

(1) pro- 
curing 
rude pro- 
duce, 

(2) man- 
ufactur- 
ing, 



( 3 ) trans- 
portation, 


and (4) 
distribu- 
tion 


342 the wealjh of nations 

Unless a capital was employed in transporting, either the rude or 
manufactured produce, from the places where it abounds to those 
where it is wanted, no more of either could be produced than was 
necessary for the consumption of the neighbourhood. The capital of 
the merchant exchanges the surplus produce of one place for that 
of another, and thus encourages the industry and increases the en- 
joyments of both. 

Unless a capital was employed in breaking and dividing certain 
portions either of the rude or manufactured produce, into such small 
parcels as suit the occasional demands of those who want them, 
every man would be obliged to purchase a greater quantity of the 
goods he wanted, than his immediate occasions required. If there 
was no such trade as a butcher, for example, every man would be 
obliged to purchase a whole ox or a whole sheep at a time. This 
would generally be inconvenient to the rich, and much more so to 
the poor. If a poor workman was obliged to purchase a month’s or 
six months provisions at a time, a great part of the stock which he 
employs as a capital in the instruments of his trade, or in the furni- 
ture of his shop, and which yields him a revenue, he would be forced 
to place in that part of his stock which is reserved for immediate 
consumption, and which yields him no revenue. Nothing can be 
more convenient for such a person than to be able to purchase his 
subsistence from day to day, or even from hour to hour, as he wants 
it. He is thereby enabled to employ almost his whole stock as a capi- 
tal. He is thus enabled to furnish work to a greater value, and the 
profit, which he makes by it in this way, much more than compen- 
sates the additional price which the profit of the retailer imposes 
upon the goods. The prejudices of some political writers against 
shopkeepers and tradesmen, are altogether without foundation. So 
far is it from being necessary, either to tax them, or to restrict their 
numbers, that they can never be multiplied so as to hurt the pub- 
lick, though they may so as to hurt one another. The quantity of 
grocery goods, for example, which can be sold in a particular town, 
is limited by the demand of that town and its ^ neighbourhood. The 
capital, therefore, which can be employed in the grocery trade can- 
not exceed what is sufficient to purchase that quantity. If this capi- 
tal is divided between two different grocers, their competition will 
tend to make both of them sell cheaper, than if it were in the hands 
of one only; and if it were divided among twenty, their competition 
would be just so much the greater, and the chance of their combin- 
ing together, in order to raise the price, just so much the less. Their 


^ Ed. I does not contain “its.’ 



EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 343 

competition might perhaps ruin some of themselves; but to take 
care of this is the business of the parties concerned, and it may safe- 
ly be trusted to their discretion. It can never hurt either the con- 
sumer, or the producer; on the contrary, it must tend to make the 
retailers both sell cheaper and buy dearer, than if the whole trade 
was monopolized by one or two persons. Some of them, perhaps, 
may sometimes decoy a weak customer to buy what he has no occa- 
sion for. This evil, however, is of too little importance to deserve the 
publick attention, nor would it necessarily be prevented by restrict- 
ing their numbers. It is not the multitude of de-houses, to give the 
most suspicious example, that occasions a general disposition to 
drunkenness among the common people; but that disposition aris- 
ing from other causes necessarily gives employment to a multitude 
of ale-houses. 

The persons whose capitals are employed in any of those four 
ways are themselves productive labourers. Their labour, when prop- 
erly directed, fixes and realizes itself in the subject or vendible com- 
modity upon which it is bestowed, and generally adds to its price 
the value at least of their own maintenance and consumption. The 
profits of the farmer, of the manufacturer, of the merchant, and re- 
tailer, are all drawn from the price of the goods which the two first 
produce, and the two last buy and sell. Equal capitals, however, 
employed in each of those four different ways, will immediately ^ 
put into motion very different quantities of productive labour, and 
augment too in very different proportions the value of the annual 
produce of the land and labour of the society to which they belong. 

The capital of the retailer replaces, together with its profits, that 
of the merchant of whom he purchases goods, and thereby enables 
him to continue his business. The retailer himself is the only pro- 
ductive labourer whom it immediately employs. In his profits, con- 
sists the whole value which its employment adds to the annual pro- 
duce of the land and labour of the society. 

The capital of the wholesale merchant replaces, together with 
their profits, the capitals of the farmers and manufacturers of whom 
he purchases the rude and manufactured produce which he deals in, 
and thereby enables them to continue their respective trades. It is 
by this service chiefly that he contributes indirectly to support the 
productive labour of the society, and to increase the value of its 
annual produce. His capital employs too the sailors and carriers 
who transport his goods from one place to another, and it augments 
the price of those goods by the value, not only of his profits, but of 


The em- 
ployers of 
such capi- 
tals are 
produc- 
tive la- 
bourers: 


the capital 
of the re- 
tailer em- 
ploys only 
himself ; 


the capi- 
tal of the 
merchant 
employs 
sailors 
and car- 
riers; 


- Ed. I does not contain “immediately” here or seven lines lower down. 



the capital 
of the 
manufac- 
turer em- 
ploys his 
workmen ; 


^he capital 
of the 
farmer 
employs 
his ser- 
vants and 
his cattle, 
and adds 
a much 
greater 
value to 
the an- 
imal pro- 
duce than 
other 
capital. 


344 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

their wages. This is all the productive labour which it immediately 
puts into motion, and all the value which it immediately adds to the 
annual produce. Its operation in both these respects is a good deal 
superior to that of the capital of the retailer. 

Part of the capital of the master manufacturer is employed as a 
fixed capital in the instruments of his trade, and replaces, together 
with its profits, that of some other artificer of whom he purchases 
them. Part of his circulating capital is employed in purchasing ma- 
terials, and replaces, with their profits, the capitals of the farmers 
and miners of whom he purchases them. But a great part of it is 
always, either annually, or in a much shorter period, distributed 
among the different workmen whom he employs. It augments the 
value of those materials by their wages, and by their masters profits 
upon the whole stock of wages, materials, and instruments of trade 
employed in the business. It puts immediately ^ into motion, there- 
fore, a much greater quantity of productive labour, and adds a 
much greater value to the annual produce of the land and labour of 
the society, than an equal capital in the hands of any wholesale 
merchant. 

No equal capital put^into motion a greater quantity of produc- 
tive labour than that of the farmer. Not only his labouring servants, 
but his labouring cattle, are productive labourers. In agriculture too 
nature labours along with man; and though her labour costs no ex- 
pence, its produce has its value, as well as that of the most expen- 
sive workmen. The most important operations of agriculture seem 
intended, not so much to increase, though they do that too, as to 
direct the fertility of nature towards the production of the plants 
most profitable to man. A field overgrown with briars and brambles 
may frequently produce as great a quantity of vegetables as the 
best cultivated vineyard or corn field. Planting and tillage frequent- 
ly regulate more than they animate the active fertility of nature; 
and after all their labour, a great part of the work always remains 
to be done by her. The labourers and labouring cattle, therefore, 
employed in agriculture, not only occasion, like the workmen in 
manufactures, the reproduction of a value equal to their own con- 
sumption, or to the capital which employs them, together with its 
owners profits; but of a much greater value. Over and above the 
capital of the farmer and all its profits, they regularly occasion the 
reproduction of the rent of the landlord. This rent may be consid- 
ered as the produce of those powers of nature, the use of which the 
landlord lends to the farmer. It is greater or smaller according to 


® Ed. 1 does not contain “immediately.’ 



EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 345 

the supposed extent of those powers, or in other words, according to 
the supposed natural or improved fertility of the land. It is the 
work of nature which remains after deducting or compensating 
every thing which can be regarded as the work of man. It is seldom 
less than a fourth, and frequently more than a third of the whole 
produce. No equal quantity of productive labour employed in man- 
ufactures can ever occasion so great a reproduction. In them nature 
does nothing; man does all; and the reproduction must always be 
in proportion to the strength of the agents that occasion it. The 
capital employed in agriculture, therefore, not only puts into mo- 
tion a greater quantity of productive labour than any equal capital 
employed in manufactures, but in proportion too to the quantity of 
productive labour which it employs, it adds a much greater value 
to the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, to the 
real wealth and revenue of its inhabitants. Of all the ways in which 
a capital can be employed, it is by far the most advantageous to the 
society. 

The capitals employed in the agriculture and in the retail trade 
of any society, must always reside within that society. Their em- 
ployment is confined almost to a precise spot, to the farm, and to 
the shop of the retailer. They must generally too, though there are 
some exceptions to this, belong to resident members of the society. 

The capital of a wholesale merchant, on the contrary, seems to 
have no fixed or necessary residence anywhere, but may wander 
about from place to place, according as it can either buy cheap or 
sell dear. 

The capital of the manufacturer must no doubt reside where the 
manufacture is carried on; but where this shall be is not always 
necessarily determined. It may frequently be at a great distance 
both from the place where the materials grow, and from that where 
the complete manufacture is consumed. Lyons is very distant both 
from the places which afford the materials of its manufactures, and 
from those which consume them. The people of fashion in Sicily are 
cloathed in silks made in other countries, from the materials which 
their own produces. Part of the wool of Spain is manufactured in 
Great Britain, and some part of that cloth is afterwards sent back 
to Spain. 

Whether the merchant whose capital exports the surplus produce 
of any society be a native or a foreigner, is of very little importance. 
If he is a foreigner, the number of their productive labourers is 
necessarily less than if he had been a native by one man only; and 
the value of their annual produce, by the profits of that one man. 
The sailors or carriers whom he employs may still belong indiffer- 


Capitals 
employed 
in agri- 
culture 
and retail 
trade 
must re- 
side with- 
in the 
country; 

the capital 
of the 
merchant 
may re- 
side any- 
where; 

the capital 
of the 
manufac- 
turer 
must be 
where the 
manufac- 
ture is, 
but that 
is not 
necessari- 
ly deter- 
mined. 

Whether 
the mer- 



chant who 
exports 
belongs to 
the coun- 
try or not 
makes 
little dif- 
ference. 


The capi- 
tal of the 
manufac- 
turer will 
put into 
motion 
more na- 
tive la- 
bour if it 
resides 
within the 
country, 
but may 
be useful 
even if 
outside it. 


Particu- 
lar coun- 
tries often 
have not 
enough 
capital for 
cultiva- 
tion, 

manufac- 
tures, and 
trans- 
portation. 


346 the wealth of nations 

ently either to his country, or to their country, or to some third 
country, in the same manner as if he had been a native. The capital 
of a foreigner gives a value to their surplus produce equally with 
that of a native, by exchanging it for something for which there is 
a demand at home. It as effectually replaces the capital of the per- 
son who produces that surplus, and as effectually enables him to 
continue his business ; the service by which the capital of a whole- 
sale merchant chiefly contributes to support the productive labour, 
and to augment the value of the annual produce of the society to 
which he belongs. 

It is of more consequence that the capital of the manufacturer 
should reside within the country. It necessarily puts into motion a 
greater quantity of productive labour, and adds a greater value to 
the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. It may, 
however, be very useful to the country, though it should not reside 
within it. The capitals of the British manufacturers who work up 
the flax and hemp annually imported from the coasts of the Baltic, 
are surely very useful to the countries which produce them. Those 
materials are a part of the surplus produce of those countries which, 
unless it was annually exchanged for something which is in demand 
there, would be of no value, and would soon cease to be produced. 
The merchants who export it, replace the capitals of the people who 
produce it, and thereby encourage them to continue the production ; 
and the British manufacturers replace the capitals of those mer- 
chants. 

A particular country, in the same manner as a particular person, 
may frequently not have capital sufficient both to improve and cul- 
tivate all its lands, to manufacture and prepare their whole rude 
produce for immediate use and consumption, and to transport the 
surplus part either of the rude or manufactured produce to those 
distant markets where it can be exchanged for something for which 
there is a demand at home. The inhabitants of many different parts 
of Great Britain have not capital sufficient to improve and cultivate 
all their lands. The wool of the southern counties of Scotland is, a 
great part of it, after a long land carriage through very bad roads, 
manufactured in Yorkshire, for want of a capital to manufacture it 
at home. There are many little manufacturing towns in Great Brit- 
ain, of which the inhabitants have not capital sufficient to transport 
the produce of their own industry to those distant markets where 
there is demand and consumption for it. If there are any merchants 
among them, they are properly only the agents of wealthier mer- 
chants who reside in some of the greater commercial cities. 

When the capital of any country is not sufficient for all those 



EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 347 

three purposes, in proportion as a greater share of it is employed in 
agriculture, the greater will be the quantity of productive labour 
which it puts into motion within the country; as will likewise be the 
value which its employment adds to the annual produce of the land 
and labour of the society. After agriculture, the capital employed in 
manufactures puts into motion the greatest quantity of productive 
labour, and adds the greatest value to the annual produce. That 
which is employed in the trade of exportation, has the least effect 
of any of the three. 

The country, indeed, which has not capital sufficient for all those 
three purposes, has not arrived at that degree of opulence for which 
it seems naturally destined. To attempt, however, prematurely and 
with an insufficient capital, to do all the three, is certainly not the 
shortest way for a society, no more than it would be for an individ- 
ual, to acquire a sufficient one. The capital of all the individuals of 
a nation, has its limits in the same manner as that of a single in- 
dividual, and is capable of executing only certain purposes. The 
capital of all the individuals of a nation is increased in the same 
manner as that of a single individual, by their continually accumu- 
lating and adding to it whatever they save out of their income. It is 
likely to increase the fastest, therefore, when it is employed in the 
way that affords the greatest revenue to all the inhabitants of the 
country, as they will thus be enabled to make the greatest savings. 
But the revenue of all the inhabitants of the country is necessarily 
in proportion to the value of the annual produce of their land and 
labour. 

It has been the principal cause of the rapid progress of our Amer- 
ican colonies towards wealth and greatness, that almost their whole 
capitals have hitherto been employed in agriculture.'^ They have no 
manufactures, those houshold and coarser manufactures excepted 
which necessarily accompany the progress of agriculture, and which 
are the work of the women and children in every private family. 
The greater part both of the exportation and coasting trade of 
America, is carried on by the capitals of merchants who reside in 
Great Britain. Even the stores and warehouses from which goods 
are retailed in some provinces, particularly in Virginia and Mary- 
land, belong many of them to merchants who reside in the mother 
country, and afford one of the few instances of the retail trade of a 
society being carried on by the capitals of those who are not resi- 
dent members of it. Were the Americans, either by combination or 
by any other sort of violence, to stop the importation of European 
manufactures, and, by thus giving a monopoly to such of their own 

^ Below, p. 392. 


In such 
cases the 
larger the 
propor- 
tion em- 
ployed in 
agricul- 
ture, the 
larger will 
be the an- 
nual pro- 
duce. 

The 

quickest 
way to 
make the 
capital 
sufficient 
for all 
these pur- 
poses is to 
begin 
with the 
most pro- 
fitable. 


That they 
have done 
so is the 
principal 
cause of 
the prog- 
ress of the 
American 
colonies. 



Great 
countries 
have 
scarcely 
ever ac- 
quired 
sufficient 
capital for 
all those 
purposes. 


Different 
kinds of 
wholesale 
trade em- 
ploy dif- 
ferent 
quantities 
of pro- 
ductive 
labour 
and add 
different 
amounts 
to the an- 
nual pro- 
duce. 

There are 
three dif- 


348 the wealth of nations 

countrymen as could manufacture the like goods, divert any con- 
siderable part of their capital into this employment, they would re- 
tard instead of accelerating the further increase in the value of their 
annual produce, and would obstruct instead of promoting the prog- 
ress of their country towards real wealth and greatness. This would 
be still more the case, were they to attempt, in the same manner, to 
monopolize to themselves their whole exportation trade. 

The course of human prosperity, indeed, seems scarce ever to 
have been of so long continuance as to enable any great country to 
acquire capital sufficient for all those three purposes; unless, per- 
haps, we give credit to the wonderful accounts of the wealth and 
cultivation of China, of those of antient Egypt, and of the antient 
state of Indostan. Even those three countries, the wealthiest, ac- 
cording to all accounts, that ever were in the world, are chiefly re- 
nowned for their superiority in agriculture and manufactures. They 
do not appear to have been eminent for foreign trade. The antient 
Egyptians had a superstitious antipathy to the sea; ® a superstition 
nearly of the same kind prevails among the Indians; and the Chi- 
nese have never excelled in foreign commerce. The greater part of 
the surplus produce of all those three countries seems to have been 
always exported by foreigners, who gave in exchange for it some- 
thing else for which they found a demand there, frequently gold 
and silver. 

It is thus that the same capital will in any country put into mo- 
tion a greater or smaller quantity of productive labour, and add a 
greater or smaller value to the annual produce of its land and la- 
bour, according to the different proportions in which it is employed 
in agriculture, manufactures, and wholesale trade. The difference 
too is very great, according to the different sorts of wholesale trade 
in which any part of it is employed. 

All wholesale trade, all buying in order to sell again by wholesale, 
may be reduced to three different sorts. The home trade, the foreign 
trade of consumption, and the carrying trade. The home trade is 
employed in purchasing in one part of the same country, and sell- 
ing in another, the produce of the industry of that country. It com- 
prehends both the inland and the coasting trade. The foreign trade 
of consumption is employed in purchasing foreign goods for home 
consumption. The carrying trade is employed in transacting the 

"Possibly the supposed authority for this statement is Montesquieu, Esprit 
m LoiSf liv. xxi., ch. vi.: “L’Egypte ^loignee par la religion et par les mceurs 
de toute communication avec les Strangers, ne faisait guere de commerce au- 
dehors. . . Les Egyptiens furent si peu jaloux du commerce du dehors qu’ils 
que^port de la mer rouge a toutes les petites nations qui y eurent quel- 



EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 349 

commerce of foreign countries, or in carr5dng the surplus produce 
of one to another. 

The capital which is employed in purchasing in one part of the 
country in order to sell in another the produce of the industry of 
that country, generally replaces by every such operation two dis- 
tinct capitals that had both been employed in the agriculture or 
manufactures of that country, and thereby enables them to con- 
tinue that employment. When it sends out from the residence of the 
merchant a certain value of commodities, it generally brings back 
in return at least an equal value of other commodities. When both 
are the produce of domestick industry, it necessarily replaces by 
every such operation two distinct capitals, which had both been em- 
ployed in supporting productive labour, and thereby enables them 
to continue that support. The capital which sends Scotch manufac- 
tures to London, and brings back English corn and manufactures 
to Edinburgh, necessarily replaces, by every such operation, two 
British capitals which had both been employed in the agriculture 
or manufactures of Great Britain. 

The capital employed in purchasing foreign goods for home-con- 
sumption, when this purchase is made with the produce of domes- 
tick industry, replaces too, by every such operation, two distinct 
capitals ; but one of them only is employed in supporting domestick 
industry. The capital which sends British goods to Portugal, and 
brings back Portuguese goods to Great Britain, replaces by every 
such operation only one British capital. The other is a Portuguese 
one. Though the returns, therefore, of the foreign trade of consump- 
tion should be as quick as those of the home-trade, the capital em- 
ployed in it will give but one-half the encouragement to the indus- 
try or productive labour of the country. 

But the returns of the foreign trade of consumption are very sel- 
dom so quick as those of the home-trade. The returns of the home- 
trade generally come in before the end of the year, and sometimes 
three or four times in the year. The returns of the foreign trade of 
consumption seldom come in before the end of the year, and some- 
times not till after two or three years. A capital, therefore, employed 
in the home-trade will sometimes make twelve operations, or be 
sent out and returned twelve times, before a capital employed in 
the foreign trade of consumption has made one. If the capitals are 
equal, therefore, the one will give four and twenty times more en- 
couragement and support to the industry of the country than the 
other.^ 

® If this doctrine as to the advantage of quick returns had been applied 
earlier in the chapter, it would have made havoc of the argument as to the 
superiorit} of agriculture 


ferent 

kinds of 

trade 

home, 

foreign 

and 

carrying. 

Capital 
employed 
in buying 
in one 
part of 
the coun- 
try to sell 
in another 
replaces 
two do- 
mestic 
capitals 


Capital 
employed 
in impor- 
tatioji re- 
places one 
domestic 
and one 
foreign 
capital. 


Its returns 
are not so 
quick as 
those of 
home 
trade. 



Round- 
about 
foreign 
trade has 
the same 
effect as 
direct. 


Foreign 
trade car- 
ried on by 
means of 
gold and 


350 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

The foreign goods for home-consumption may sometimes be pur- 
chased, not with the produce of domestick industry, but with some 
other foreign goods. These last, however, must have been purchased 
either immediately with the produce of domestick industry, or with 
something else that had been purchased with it; for the case of war 
and conquest excepted, foreign goods can never be acquired, but in 
exchange for something that had been produced at home, either im- 
mediately, or after two or more different exchanges. The effects, 
therefore, of a capital employed in such a round-about foreign trade 
of consumption, are, in every respect, the same as those of one em- 
ployed in the most direct trade of the same kind, except that the 
final returns are likely to be still more distant, as they must depend 
upon the returns of two or three distinct foreign trades. If the flax 
and hemp of Riga are purchased with the tobacco of Virginia, which 
had been purchased with British manufactures, the merchant must 
wait for the returns of two distinct foreign trades before he can em- 
ploy the same capital in re-purchasing a like quantity of British 
manufactures. If the tobacco of Virginia had been purchased, not 
with British manufactures, but with the sugar and rum of Jamaica 
which had been purchased with those manufactures, he must wait 
for the returns of three. If those two or three distinct foreign trades 
should happen to be carried on by two or three distinct merchants, 
of whom the second buys the goods imported by the first, and the 
third buys those imported by the second, in order to export them 
again, each merchant indeed will in this case receive the returns of 
his own capital more quickly; but the final Teturns of the whole 
capital employed in the trade will be just as slow as ever. Whether 
the whole capital employed in such a round-about trade belong to 
one merchant or to three, can make no difference with regard to 
the country, though it may with regard to the particular merchants. 
Three times a greater capital must in both cases be employed, in 
order to exchange a certain value of British manufactures for a cer- 
tain quantity of flax and hemp, than would have been necessary, 
had the manufactures and the flax and hemp been directly ex- 
changed for one another. The whole capital employed, therefore, 
in such a round-about foreign trade of consumption, will generally 
give less encouragement and support to the productive labour of 
the country, than an equal capital employed in a more direct trade 
of the same kind. 

Whatever be the foreign commodity with which the foreign goods 
for home-consumption are purchased, it can occasion no essential 
difference either in the nature of the trade, or in the encouragement 
and support which it can give to the productive labour of the coun- 



EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 35^ 

try from which it is carried on. If they are purchased with the gold 
of Brpii, for example, or with the silver of Peru, this gold and sil- 
ver, like the tobacco of Virginia, must have been purchased with 
something that either was the produce of the industiy of the coun- 
try, or that had been purchased with something else that was so. So 
far, therefore, as the productive labour of the country is concerned, 
the foreign trade of consumption which is carried on by means of 
gold and silver, has all the advantages and all the inconveniences 
of any other equally round-about foreign trade of consumption, and 
will replace just as fast or just as slow the capital which is immedi- 
ately employed in supporting that productive labour. It seems even 
to have one advantage over any other equally round-about foreign 
trade. The transportation of those metals from one place to another, 
on account of their small bulk and great value, is less expensive 
than that of almost any other foreign goods of equal value. Their 
freight is much less, and their insurance not greater; and no goods, 
besides, are less liable to suffer by the carriage.'' An equal quantity 
of foreign goods, therefore, may frequently be purchased with a 
smaller quantity of the produce of domestick industry, by the in- 
tervention of gold and silver, than by that of any other foreign 
goods. The demand of the country may frequently, in this manner, 
be supplied more completely and at a smaller expence than in any 
other. Whether, by the continual exportation of those metals, a 
trade of this kind is likely to impoverish the country from which it 
is carried on, in any other way, I shall have occasion to examine at 
great length hereafter.® 

That part of the capital of any country which is employed in the 
carr3dng trade, is altogether withdrawn from supporting the pro- 
ductive labour of that particular country, to support that of some 
foreign countries. Though it may replace by every operation two 
distinct capitals, yet neither of them belongs ® to that particular 
country. The capital of the Dutch merchant, which carries the corn 
of Poland to Portugal, and brings back the fruits and wines of 
Portugal to Poland, replaces by every such operation two capitals, 
neither of which had been employed in supporting the productive 
labour of Holland; but one of them in supporting that of Poland, 
and the other that of Portugal. The profits only return regularly to 
Holland, and constitute the whole addition which this trade neces- 
sarily makes to the annual produce of the land and labour of that 
country. When, indeed, the carrying trade of any particular coun- 
try is carried on with the ships and sailors of that country, that part 

^ The second part of this sentence is not in Ed i ® Bk iv 

“ Ed. I reads “belong.” 


silver is in 
no way 
different 
from the 
rest 


Capital 
employed 
in the 
carrying 
trade re- 
places 
two 
foreign 
capitals. 


It may 
employ 



ships and 
sailors 
belonging 
to the 
countiy, 
but this is 
not al- 
ways the 
case. 


and equal 
capital 
employed 
in impor- 
tation or 
coasting 
trade may 
employ as 
many 
ships and 
men 


Capital in 
home 
trade 
therefore 
supports 
more pro- 
ductive 
labour 
than capi- 
tal em- 
ployed in 
foreign 
trade, 
which, 
however, 
supports 
more than 
capital in 


352 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

of the capital employed in it which pays the freight, is distributed 
among, and puts into motion, a certain number of productive la- 
bourers of that country. Almost all nations that have had any con- 
siderable share of the carrying trade have, in fact, carried it on in 
this manner. The trade itself has probably derived its name from 
it, the people of such countries being the carriers to other countries. 
It does not, however, seem essential to the nature of the trade that 
it should be so. A Dutch merchant may, for example, employ his 
capital in transacting the commerce of Poland and Portugal, by 
carrying part of the surplus produce of the one to the other, not in 
Dutch, but in British bottoms. It may be presumed, that he ac- 
tually does so upon some particular occasions. It is upon this ac- 
count, however, that the carrying trade has been supposed peculiar- 
ly advantageous to such a country as Great Britain, of which the 
defence and security depend upon the number of its sailors and 
shipping. But the same capital may employ as many sailors and 
shipping, either in the foreign trade of consumption, or even in the 
home-trade, when carried on by coasting vessels, as it could in the 
carrying trade. The number of sailors and shipping which any par- 
ticular capital can employ, does not depend upon the nature of the 
trade, but partly upon the bulk of the goods in proportion to their 
value, and partly upon the distance of the ports between which they 
are to be carried; chiefly upon the former of those two circum- 
stances. The coal-trade from Newcastle to London, for example, 
employs more shipping than all the carrying trade of England, 
though the ports are at no great distance. To force, therefore, by 
extraordinary encouragements, a larger share of the capital of any 
country into the carrying trade, than what would naturally go to it, 
will not always necessarily increase the shipping of that country. 

The capital, therefore, employed in the home-trade of any coun- 
try will generally give encouragement and support to a greater 
quantity of productive labour in that country, and increase the 
value of its annual produce more than an equal capital employed 
in the foreign trade of consumption: and the capital employed in 
this latter trade has in both these respects a still greater advantage 
over an equal capital employed in the carr5dng trade. The riches, 
and so far as power depends upon riches, the power of every coun- 
try, must always be in proportion to the value of its annual produce, 
the fund from which all taxes must ultimately be paid. But the 
great object of the political (economy of every country, is to in- 
crease the riches and power of that country. It ought, therefore, to 
give no preference nor superior encouragement to the foreign trade 
of consumption above the home-trade, nor to the carrying trade 



EMPLOYMENT OF CAPITALS 353 

above either of the other two. It ought neither to force nor to allure 
into either of those two channels, a greater share of the capital of 
the country than what would naturally flow into them of its own 
accord. 

Each of those different branches of trade, however, is not only 
advantageous, but necessary and unavoidable, when the course of 
things, without any constraint or violence, naturally introduces it. 

When the produce of any particular branch of industry exceeds 
what the demand of the country requires, the surplus must be sent 
abroad, and exchanged for something for which there is a demand 
at home. Without such exportation, a part of the productive labour 
of the country must cease,^® and the value of its annual produce 
diminish. The land and labour of Great Britain produce generally 
more corn, woollens, and hard ware, than the demand of the home- 
market requires. The surplus part of them, therefore, must be sent 
abroad, and exchanged for something for which there is a demand 
at home. It is only by means of such exportation, that this surplus 
can acquire a value sufficient to compensate the labour and ex- 
pence of producing it. The neighbourhood of the sea coast, and the 
banks of all navigable rivers are advantageous situations for indus- 
try, only because they facilitate the exportation and exchange of 
such surplus produce for something else which is more in demand 
there. 

When the foreign goods which are thus purchased with the sur- 
plus produce of domestic industry exceed the demand of the home- 
market, the surplus part of them must be sent abroad again, and 
exchanged for something more in demand at home. About ninety- 
six thousand hogsheads of tobacco are annually purchased in Vir- 
ginia and Maryland, with a part of the surplus produce of British 
industry. But the demand of Great Britain does not require, per- 
haps, more than fourteen thousand.^^ If the remaining eighty-two 
thousand, therefore, could not be sent abroad and exchanged for 
something more in demand at home, the importation of them must 
cease immediately, and with it the productive labour of all those in- 
habitants of Great Britain, who are at present employed in prepar- 
ing the goods with which these eighty-two thousand hogsheads are 
annually purchased. Those goods, which are part of the produce of 

“ But why may not the labour be diverted to the production of “some- 
thing for which there is a demand at home”? The “corn, woollens and hard- 
ware” immediately below perhaps suggest that it is supposed the country has 
certain physical characteristics which compel its inhabitants to produce par- 
ticular commodities 

^ Below, p. 467 The figures 96,000 and 13,500 are given in the continuation 
of Anderson’s Commerce, a.d 1775, ed. of 1801, vol iv., p 187 


the carry- 
ing trade. 

Political 
economy 
ought 
conse- 
quentl> 
not to al- 
lure capi- 
tal into 
the 

foreign or 
the carry- 
ing trade, 

though 
each is 
advanta- 
geous 
when na- 
turally 
intro- 
duced. 

The sur- 
plus of 
the pro- 
duce of 
particulai 
branches 
of indus- 
try must 
be sent 
abroad- 

Foreign 
goods ob- 
tained in 
exchange 
must 
often be 
re-export 
ed 



When the 
other em- 
ployments 
are full, 
the sur- 
plus capi- 
tal dis- 
gorges it- 
self into 
the carry- 
ing trade, 
which is 
a symp- 
tom 
rather 
than a 
cause of 
great na- 
tional 
wealth. 


The pos- 
sible ex- 
tent of the 
carrying 
trade is 
much the 
greatest. 


354 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the land and labour of Great Britain, having no market at home, 
and being deprived of that which they had abroad, must cease to 
be produced. The most round-about foreign trade of consumption, 
therefore, may, upon some occasions, be as necessary for supporting 
the productive labour of the country, and the value of its annual 
produce, as the most direct. 

When the capital stock of any country is increased to such a de- 
gree, that it cannot be all employed in supplying the consumption, 
and supporting the productive labour of that particular country, 
the surplus part of it naturally disgorges itself into the carr3dng 
trade, and is employed in performing the same offices to other coun- 
tries. The carrying trade is the natural effect and symptom of great 
national wealth; but it does not seem to be the natural cause of it. 
Those statesmen who have been disposed to favour it with particu- 
lar encouragements, seem to have mistaken the effect and symptom 
for the cause. Holland, in proportion to the extent of the land and 
the number of its inhabitants, by far the richest country in Europe, 
has, accordingly, the greatest share of the carrying trade of Europe. 
England, perhaps the second richest country of Europe, is likewise 
supposed to have a considerable share of it; though what commonly 
passes for the carr)dng trade of England, will frequently, perhaps, 
be found to be no more than a round-about foreign trade of con- 
sumption. Such are, in a great measure, the trades which carry the 
goods of the East and West Indies, and of America, to different 
European markets. Those goods are generally purchased either im- 
mediately with the produce of British industry, or with something 
else which had been purchased with that produce, and the final re- 
turns of those trades are generally used or consumed in Great Brit- 
ain. The trade which is carried on in British bottoms between the 
different ports of the Mediterranean, and some trade of the same 
kind carried on by British merchants between the different ports 
of India, make, perhaps, the principal branches of what is properly 
the carrying trade of Great Britain. 

The extent of the home-trade and of the capital which can be em- 
ployed in it, is necessarily limited by the value of the surplus pro- 
duce of all those distant places within the country which have occa- 
sion to exchange their respective productions with one another. 
That of the foreign trade of consumption, by the value of the sur- 
plus produce of the whole countr)^ and of what can be purchased 
with it. That of the carrying trade, by the value of the surplus pro- 
duce of all the different countries in the world. Its possible extent, 
therefore, is in a manner infinite in comparison of that of the other 
two, and is capable of absorbing the greatest capitals. 



EMPLOYMENT OP CAPITALS 355 

The consideration of his own private profit, is the sole motive 
which determines the owner of any capital to employ it either in 
agriculture, in manufactures, or in some particular branch of the 
wholesale or retail trade. The different quantities of productive la- 
bour which it may put into motion, and the different values which 
it may add to the annual produce of the land and labour of the so- 
ciety, according as it is employed in one or other of those different 
ways, never enter into his thoughts. In countries, therefore, where 
agriculture is the most profitable of all employments, and farming 
and improving the most direct roads to a splendid fortune, the capi- 
tals of individuals will naturally be employed in the manner most 
advantageous to the whole society. The profits of agriculture, how- 
ever, seem to have no superiority over those of other employments 
in any part of Europe. Projectors, indeed, in every corner of it, 
have within these few years amused the public with most magnifi- 
cent accounts of the profits to be made by the cultivation and im- 
provement of land. Without entering into any particular discussion 
of their calculations, a very simple observation may satisfy us that 
the result of them must be false. We see every day the most splen- 
did fortunes that have been acquired in the course of a single life 
by trade and manufactures, frequently from a very small capital, 
sometimes from no capital. A single instance of such a fortune ac- 
quired by agriculture in the same time, and from such a capital, has 
not, perhaps, occurred in Europe during the course of the present 
century. In all the great countries of Europe, however, much good 
land still remains uncultivated, and the greater part of what is cul- 
tivated, is far from being improved to the degree of which it is cap- 
able. Agriculture, therefore, is almost every-where capable of ab- 
sorbing a much greater capital than has ever yet been employed in 
it. What circumstances in the policy of Europe have given the 
trades which are carried on in towns so great an advantage over 
that which is carried on in the country, that private persons fre- 
quently find it more for their advantage to employ their capitals in 
the most distant carrying trades of Asia and America, than in the 
improvement and cultivation of the most fertile fields in their own 
neighbourhood, I shall endeavour to explain at full length in the 
two following books. 


Agricul- 
ture does 
not yield 
sufficient 
profit to 
attract all 
the capital 
which it 
might ab- 
sorb. 


The rea- 
son will 
be ex- 
plained in 
the next 
two 
books. 



BOOK III 


Of the different Progress of Opulence in different Nations 
CHAPTER I 

OF THE NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE 


The great 
commerce 
is that be- 
tween 
town and 
country, 
which IS 
obviously 
advanta- 
geous to 
both. 


The great commerce of every civilized society, is that carried on 
between the inhabitants of the town and those of the country. It 
consists in the exchange of rude for manufactured produce, either 
immediately, or by the intervention of money, or of some sort of 
paper which represents money. The country supplies the town with 
the means of subsistence, and the materials of manufacture. The 
town repays this supply by sending back a part of the manufac- 
tured produce to the inhabitants of the country. The town, in which 
there neither is nor can be any reproduction of substances,^ maj^ 
very properly be said to gain its whole wealth and subsistence from 
the country. We must not, however, upon this account, imagine 
that the gain of the town is the loss of the country. The gains of 
both are mutual and reciprocal, and the division of labour is in this, 
as in all other cases, advantageous to all the different persons em- 
ployed in the various occupations into which it is subdivided. The 
inhabitants of the country purchase of the town a greater quantity 
of manufactured goods, with the produce of a much smaller quan- 
tity of their own labour, than they must have employed had they 
attempted to prepare them themselves. The town affords a market 
for the surplus produce of the country, or what is over and above 
the maintenance of the cultivators, and it is there that the inhabi- 
tants of the country exchange it for something else which is in de- 
mand among them. The greater the number and revenue of the in- 
habitants of the town, the more extensive is the market which it 
affords to those of the country; and the more extensive that mar- 


^ The error that agriculture produces substances and manufacture only al- 
ters them IS doubtless at the bottom of much of the support gained by the 
theory of productive and unproductive labour 

356 



NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE 357 

ket, it is always the more advantageous to a great number. The 
corn which grows within a mile of the town, sells there for the same 
price with that which comes from twenty miles distance. But the 
price of the latter must generally, not only pay the expence of rais- 
ing and bringing it to market, but afford too the ordinary profits of 
agriculture to the farmer. The proprietors and cultivators of the 
country, therefore, which lies in the neighbourhood of the town, 
over and above the ordinary profits of agriculture, gain, in the price 
of what they sell, the whole value of the carriage of the like produce 
that is brought from more distant parts, and they save, besides, the 
whole value of this carriage in the price of what they buy. Compare 
the cultivation of the lands in the neighbourhood of any consider- 
able town, with that of those which lie at some distance from it, 
and you will easily satisfy yourself how much the country is bene- 
fited by the commerce of the town. Among all the absurd specula- 
tions that have been propagated concerning the balance of trade, it 
has never been pretended that either the country loses by its com- 
merce with the town, or the town by that with the country which 
maintains it. 

As subsistence is, in the nature of things, prior to conveniency 
and luxury, so the industry which procures the former, must neces- 
sarily be prior to that which ministers to the latter. The cultivation 
and improvement of the country, therefore, which affords subsist- 
ence, must, necessarily, be prior to the increase of the town, which 
furnishes only the means of conveniency and luxury. It is the sur- 
plus produce of the country only, or what is over and above the 
maintenance of the cultivators, that constitutes the subsistence of 
the town, which can therefore increase only with the increase of 
this surplus produce. The town, indeed, may not always derive its 
whole subsistence from the country in its neighbourhood, or even 
from the territory to which it belongs, but from very distant coun- 
tries; and this, though it forms no exception from the general rule, 
has occasioned considerable variations in the progress of opulence 
in different ages and nations. 

That order of things which necessity imposes in general, though 
not in every particular country, is, in every particular country, pro- 
moted by the natural inclinations of man. If human institutions had 
never thwarted those natural inclinations, the towns could no-where 
have increased beyond what the improvement and cultivation of 
the territory in which they were situated could support; till such 
time, at least, as the whole of that territory was completely culti- 
vated and improved. Upon equal, or nearly equal profits, most 
men will chuse to employ their capitals rather in the improvement 


The culti- 
vation of 
the coun- 
try must 
be prior 
to the in- 
crease of 
the town, 


though 
the town 
may 

sometimes 
be distant 
from the 
country 
from 
which it 
derives its 
subsist- 
ence. 

This order 
of things 
is fa- 
voured by 
the natu- 
ral prefer- 



ence of 
man for 
agricul- 
ture. 


Cultivat- 
ors re- 
quire the 
assistance 
of artifi- 
cers, who 
settle to- 
gether and 
forma 
village, 
and their 
employ- 
ment aug- 
ments 
with the 
improve- 
ment of 
the coun- 
try. 


35S the wealth of nations 

and cultivation of land, than either in manufactures or in foreign 
trade. The man who employs his capital in land, has it more under 
his view and command, and his fortune is much less liable to acci- 
dents, than that of the trader, who is obliged frequently to com- 
mit it, not only to the winds and the waves, but to the more uncer- 
tain elements of human folly and injustice, by giving great credits 
in distant countries to men, with whose character and situation he 
can seldom be thoroughly acquainted. The capital of the landlord, 
on the contrary, which is fixed in the improvement of his land, 
seems to be as well secured as the nature of human affairs can ad- 
mit of. The beauty of the country besides, the pleasures of a coun- 
try life, the tranquillity of mind which it promises, and wherever 
the injustice of human laws does not disturb it, the independency 
which it really affords, have charms that more or less attract every 
body; and as to cultivate the ground was the original destination of 
man, so in every stage of his existence he seems to retain a predilec- 
tion for this primitive employment. 

Without the assistance of some artificers, indeed, the cultivation 
of land cannot be carried on, but with great inconveniency and con- 
tinual interruption. Smiths, carpenters, wheel-wrights, and plough- 
wrights, masons, and bricklayers, tanners, shoemakers, and taylors, 
are people, whose service the farmer has frequent occasion for. Such 
artificers too stand, occasionally, in need of the assistance of one 
another; and as their residence is not, like that of the farmer, neces- 
sarily tied down to a precise spot, they naturally settle in the neigh- 
bourhood of one another, and thus form a small town or village. 
The butcher, the brewer, and the baker, soon join them, together 
with many other artificers and retailers, necessary or useful for sup- 
plying their occasional wants, and who contribute still further to 
augment the town. The inhabitants of the town and those of the 
country are mutually the servants of one another. The town is a 
continual fair or market, to which the inhabitants of the country 
resort, in order to exchange their rude for manufactured produce.^ 
It is this commerce which supplies the inhabitants of the town both 
with the materials of their work, and the means of their subsistence. 
The quantity of the finished work which they sell to the inhabitants 
of the country, necessarily regulates the quantity of the materials 
and provisions which they buy. Neither their employment nor sub- 
sistence, therefore, can augment, but in proportion to the augment- 
ation of the demand from the country for finished work; and this 
demand can augment only in proportion to the extension of im- 

® This passage, from the beginnmg of the paragraph, may well have been 
suggested by Cantillon, Essai, pp, 11-22. 



NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE 359 

provement and cultivation. Had human institutions, therefore, 
never disturbed the natural course of things, the progressive wealth 
and increase of the towns would, in every political society, be conse- 
quential, and in proportion to the improvement and cultivation of 
the territory or country. 

In our North American colonies, where uncultivated land is still 
to be had upon easy terms, no manufactures for distant sale have 
ever yet been established in any of their towns. When an artificer 
has acquired a little more stock than is necessary for carrying on 
his own business in supplying the neighbouring country, he does 
not, in North America, attempt to establish with it a manufacture 
for more distant sale, but employs it in the purchase and improve- 
ment of uncultivated land. From artificer he becomes planter, and 
neither the large wages nor the easy subsistence which that country 
affords to artificers, can bribe him rather to work for other people 
than for himself. He feels that an artificer is the servant of his cus- 
tomers, from whom he derives his subsistence; but that a planter 
who cultivates his own land, and derives his necessary subsistence 
from the labour of his own family, is really a master, and indepen- 
dent of all the world. 

In countries, on the contrary, where there is either no unculti- 
vated land, or none that can be had upon easy terms, every artificer 
who has acquired more stock than he can employ in the occasional 
jobs of the neighbourhood, endeavours to prepare work for more 
distant sale. The smith erects some sort of iron, the weaver some 
sort of linen or woollen manufactory. Those different manufactures 
come, in process of time, to be gradually subdivided, and thereby 
improved and refined in a great variety of ways, which may easily 
be conceived, and which it is therefore unnecessary to explain any 
further. 

In seeking for employment to a capital, manufactures are, upon 
equal or nearly equal profits, naturally preferred to foreign com- 
merce, for the same reason that agriculture is naturally preferred to 
manufactures. As the capital of the landlord or farmer is more se- 
cure than that of the manufacturer, so the capital of the manufac- 
turer, being at all times more within his view and command, is more 
secure than that of the foreign merchant. In every period, indeed, 
of every society, the surplus part both of the rude and manufac- 
tured produce, or that for which there is no demand at home, must 
be sent abroad in order to be exchanged for something for which 
there is some demand at home. But whether the capital, which car- 
ries this surplus produce abroad, be a foreign or a domestic one, is 
of very little importance. If the society has not acquired sufficient 


In the 
American 
colonies 
an arti- 
ficer who 
has ac- 
quired 
sufficient 
stock be- 
comes a 
planter 
instead of 
manufac- 
turing for 
distant 
sale, 


as in 
countries 
where no 
unculti- 
vated land 
can be 
procured. 


Manufac- 
tures are 
naturally 
preferred 
to foreign 
com- 
merce. 



So the 
natural 
course of 
things is 
first agri- 
culture, 
then 

manufac- 
tures, and 
finally 
foreign 
com- 
merce 

But this 
order has 
been in 
many re- 
spects in- 
verted. 


360 the wealth of nations 

capital both to cultivate all its lands, and to manufacture in the 
completest manner the whole of its ® rude produce, there is even a 
considerable advantage that that rude produce should ^ be exported 
by a foreign capital, in order that the whole stock of the society may 
be employed in more useful purposes. The wealth of ancient Egypt, 
that of China and Indostan, sufficiently demonstrate that a nation 
may attain a very high degree of opulence, though the greater part 
of its exportation trade be carried on by foreigners. The progress of 
our North American and West Indian colonies would have been 
much less rapid, had not capital but what belonged to themselves 
been employed in exporting their surplus produce. 

According to the natural course of things, therefore, the greater 
part of the capital of every growing society is, first, directed to 
agriculture, afterwards to manufactures, and last of all to foreign 
commerce. This order of things is so very natural, that in every so- 
ciety that had any territory, it has always, I believe, been in some 
degree observed. Some of their lands must have been cultivated be- 
fore any considerable towns could be established, and some sort of 
coarse industry of the manufacturing kind must have been carried 
on in those towns, before they could well think of ejnploying them- 
selves in foreign commerce. 

But though this natural order of things must have taken place in 
some degree in every such society, it has, in all the modern states 
of Europe, been, in many respects, entirely inverted. The foreign 
commerce of some of their cities has introduced all their finer manu- 
factures, or such as were fit for distant sale; and manufactures and 
foreign commerce together, have given birth to the principal im- 
provements of agriculture. The manners and customs which the na- 
ture of their original government introduced, and which remained 
after that government was greatly altered, necessarily forced them 
into this unnatural and retrograde order. 

*Ed. I reads “their ” 

^Ed. I reads “considerable advantage that it should.” 


i 





CHAPTER II 

OF THE DISCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE IN THE ANCIENT STATE 
OF EUROPE AFTER THE FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE 

When the German and Sc5rthian nations over-ran the western prov- 
inces of the Roman empire, the confusions which followed so great 
a revolution lasted for several centuries. The rapine and violence 
which the barbarians exercised against the ancient inhabitants, in- 
terrupted the commerce between the towns and the country. The 
towns were deserted, and the country was left uncultivated, and the 
western provinces of Europe, which had enjoyed a considerable de- 
gree of opulence under the Roman empire, sunk into the lowest 
state of poverty and barbarism. During the continuance of those 
confusions, the chiefs and principal leaders of those nations, ac- 
quired or usurped to themselves the greater part of the lands of 
those countries. A great part of them was uncultivated; but no part 
of them, whether cultivated or uncultivated, was left without a pro- 
prietor. All of them were engrossed, and the greater part by a few 
great proprietors. 

This original engrossing of uncultivated lands, though a great, 
might have been but a transitory evil. They might soon have been 
divided again, and broke into small parcels either by succession or 
by alienation. The law of primogeniture hindered them from being 
divided by succession: the introduction of entails prevented their 
being broke into small parcels by alienation.^ 

When land, like moveables, is considered as the means only of 
subsistence and enjoyment, the natural law of succession divides it, 
like them, among all the children of the family; of all of whom the 
subsistence and enjoyment may be supposed equally dear to the 
father. This natural law of succession accordingly took place 
among the Romans, who made no more distinction between elder 
and younger, between male and female, in the inheritance of lands, 
than we do in the distribution of moveables. But when land was 

^ Primogeniture and entails are censured as inimical to agriculture in Lec- 
tures, pp 120, 124, 228 


After the 
fall of the 
Roman 
Empire 
all the 
land of 
Western 
Europe 
was en- 
grossed, 
chiefly by 
large pro- 
prietors. 


Primo- 
geniture 
and en- 
tails pre- 
vented the 
great 
estates 
being 
divided. 

Primo- 
geniture 
was intro- 
duced be- 
cause 
every 
great 
landlord 
was a 


361 



pettj 

^>rince. 


It is now 
unreason- 
able, but 
supports 
the pride 
of family 
distinc- 
tions 


Entails 
have the 
same 
origin, 


362 the wealth of nations 

considered as the means, not|,of subsistence merely, but of power 
and protection, it was thought better that it should descend undi- 
vided to one. In those disorderly times, every great landlord was a 
sort of petty prince. His tenants were ‘his subjects. He was their 
judge, and in some respects their legislator in peace, and their 
leader in war. He made war according to his own discretion, fre- 
quently against his neighbours, and sometimes against his sove- 
reign. The security of a landed estate, therefore, the protection 
which its owner could afford to those who dwelt on it, depended 
upon its greatness. To divide it was to ruin it, and to expose every 
part of it to be oppressed and swallowed up by the incursions of 
its neighbours. The law of primogeniture, therefore, came to take 
place, not immediately, indeed, but in process of time, in the suc- 
cession of landed estates, for the same reason that it has generally 
taken place in that of monarchies, though not always at their first 
institution. That the power, and consequently the security of the 
monarchy, may not be weakened by division, it must descend en- 
tire to one of the -children. To which of them so important a pre- 
ference shall be given, must be determined by some general rule, 
founded not upon the doubtful distinctions of personal merit, but 
upon some plain and evident difference which can admit of no dis- 
pute. Among the children of the same family, there can be no in- 
disputable difference but that of sex, and that of age. The male 
sex is universally preferred to the female; and when all other 
things are equal, the elder every-where takes place of the younger. 
Hence the origin of the right of primogeniture, and of what is 
called lineal succession.^ 

Laws frequently continue in force long after the circumstances, 
which first gave occasion to them, and which could alone render 
them reasonable, are no more. In the present state of Europe, the 
proprietor of a single acre of land is as perfectly secure of his pos- 
session as the proprietor of a hundred thousand. The right of prim- 
ogeniture, however, still continues to be respected, and as of all 
institutions it is the fittest to support the pride of family distinc- 
tions, it is still likely to endure for many centuries. In every other 
respect, nothing can be more contrary to the real interest of a nu- 
merous family, than a right which in order to enrich one, beggars 
all the rest of the children. 

Entails are the natural consequences of the law of primogeni- 
ture. They were introduced to preserve a certain lineal succession, 
of which the law of primogeniture first gave the idea, and to 
hinder any part of the original estate from being carried out of the 

^ Lectures, 117-118. 



DISCOURAGEMENT OP AGRICULTURE 3^3 
proposed line either by gift, or devise, or alienation ; either by the 
folly, or by the misfortune of any of its successive owners. They 
were altogether unknown to the Romans. Neither their substitu- 
tions nor fideicommisses bear any resemblance to entails, though 
some French lawyers have thought proper to dress the modern 
institution in the language and garb ^ of those antient ones.*^ 

When great landed estates were a sort of principalities, entails and are 
might not be unreasonable. Like what are called the fundamental 
laws of some monarchies, they might frequently hinder the secur- 
ity of thousands from being endangered by the caprice or extrava- 
gance of one man. But in the present state of Europe, when small 
as well as great estates derive their security from the laws of their 
country, nothing can be more completely absurd. They are founded 
upon the most absurd of all suppositions, the supposition that 
every successive generation of men have not an equal right to the 
earth, and to all that it possesses; but that the property of the 
present generation should be restrained and regulated according 
to the fancy of those who died perhaps five hundred years ago.® 

Entails, however, are still respected trough the greater part of 
Europe, in those countries particularly in which noble birth is a 
necessary qualification for the enjoyment either of civil or military 
honours. Entails are thought necessary for maintaining this ex- 
clusive privilege of the nobility to the great offices and honours of 
their country; and that order having usurped one unjust advant- 
age over the rest of their fellow-citizens, lest their poverty should 
render it ridiculous, it is thought reasonable that they should have 
another. The common law of England, indeed, is said to abhor 
perpetuities, and they are accordingly more restricted there than 
in any other European monarchy; though even England is not al- 
together without them. In Scotland more than one-fifth, perhaps 
more than one-third part of the whole lands of the country, are 
at present supposed to be ® under strict entail. 

Great tracts of uncultivated land were, in this manner, not only Great 
engrossed by particular families, but the possibility of their be- 
ing divided again was as much as possible precluded for ever. It seldom^ 

seldom happens, however, that a great proprietor is a great im- great im- 

prover. In the disorderly times which gave birth to those barbarous Plovers, 
institutions, the great proprietor was sufficiently employed in de- 
fending his own territories, or in extending his jurisdiction and au- 

® Ed. I reads “form.” 

^ In Lectures, p 123, the Roman origin of entails appears to be accepted 
® This passage follows Lectures, p 124, rather closely, reproducing even the 
repetition of “absurd ” 

® Ed I does not contain “supposed to be ” 



Ine occu- 
piers were 
not likely 
to im- 
prove, as 
they were 
slaves at- 
tached to 
the land 
and in- 
capable 
of acquir- 
ing 

property 


364 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

thority over those of his neighbours. He had no leisure to attend 
to the cultivation and improvement of land. When the establish- 
ment of law and order afforded him this leisure, he often wanted 
the inclination, and almost always the requisite abilities. If the ex- 
pence of his house and person either equalled or exceeded his rev- 
enue, as it did very frequently, he had no stock to employ in this 
manner. If he was an ceconomist, he generally found it more profit- 
able to employ his annual savings in new purchases, than in the 
improvement of his old estate. To improve land with profit, like 
all other commercial projects, requires an exact attention to small 
savings and small gains, of which a man born to a great fortune, 
even though naturally frugal, is very seldom capable. The situ- 
ation of such a person naturally disposes him to attend rather to 
ornament which pleases his fancy, than to profit for which he has 
so little occasion. The elegance of his dress, of his equipage, of his 
house, and household furniture, are objects which from his in- 
fancy he has been accustomed to have some anxiety about. The 
turn of mind which this habit naturally forms, follows him when 
he comes to think of the improvement of land. He embellishes per- 
haps four or five hundred acres in the neighbourhood of his house, 
at ten times the expence which the land is worth after all his im- 
provements; and finds that if he was to improve his whole estate 
m the same manner, and he has little taste for any other, he would 
be a bankrupt before he had finished the tenth part of it. There 
still remain in both parts of the united kingdom some great estates 
which have continued without interruption in the hands of the 
same family since the times of feudal anarchy. Compare the pres- 
ent condition of those estates with the possessions of the small 
proprietors in their neighbourhood, and you will require no other 
argument to convince you how unfavourable such extensive prop- 
erty is to improvement.'^ 

If little improvement was to be expected from such great pro- 
prietors, still less was to be hoped for from those who occupied the 
land under them. In the ancient state of Europe, the occupiers of 
land were all tenants at will. They were all or almost all slaves; 
but their slavery was of a milder kind than that known among the 
ancient Greeks and Romans, or even in our West Indian colonies. 
They were supposed to belong more directly to the land than to 
their masters. They could, therefore, be sold with it, but not 
separately. They could marry, provided it was with the consent 
of their master; and he could not afterwards dissolve the marriage 
by selling the man and wife to different persons. If he maimed or 

^This remark follows Lectures, p. 228. Cp. below, pp. 384, 385, 392. 



DISCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE 3^5 

murdered any of them, he was liable to some penalty, though gen- 
erally but to a small one. They were not, however, capable of ac- 
quiring property. Whatever they acquired was acquired to their 
master, and he could take it from them at pleasure. Whatever cul- 
tivation and improvement could be carried on by means of such 
slaves, was properly carried on by their master. It was at his ex- 
pence. The seed, the cattle, and the instruments of husbandry 
were all his. It was for his benefit. Such slaves could acquire noth- 
ing but their daily maintenance. It was properly the proprietor 
himself, therefore, that, in this case, occupied his own lands, and 
cultivated them by his own bondmen. This species of slavery still 
subsists in Russia, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, and other 
parts of Germany. It is only in the western and south-western 
provinces of Europe, that it has gradually been abolished alto- 
gether.® 

But if great improvements are seldom to be expected from great 
proprietors, they are least of all to be expected when they employ 
slaves for their workmen. The experience of all ages and nations, I 
believe, demonstrates that the work done by slaves, though it ap- 
pears to cost only their maintenance, is in the end the dearest of 
any. A person who can acquire no property, can have no other in- 
terest but to eat as much, and to labour as little as possible. What- 
ever work he does beyond what is sufficient to purchase his own 
maintenance, can be squeezed out of him by violence only, and not 
by any interest of his own. In ancient Italy, how much the culti- 
vation of corn degenerated, how unprofitable it became to the 
master when it fell under the management of slaves, is remarked 
by both Pliny and Columella.® In the time of Aristotle it had not 
been much better in ancient Greece. Speaking of the ideal republic 
described in the laws of Plato, to maintain five thousand idle men 
(the number of warriors supposed necessary for its defence) to- 
gether with their women and servants, would require, he says, a 
territory of boundless extent and fertility, like the plains of Baby- 
lon.^® 

The pride of man makes him love to domineer, and nothing 
mortifies him so much as to be obliged to condescend to persuade 
his inferiors. WTierever the law allows it, and the nature of the work 
can afford it, therefore, he will generally prefer the service of slaves 
to that of freemen. The planting of sugar and tobacco can afford 

® “A small part of the West of Europe is the only portion of the globe that 
is free from slavery,” “and is nothing in comparison with the vast continents 
where it still prevails.”— p. 96. 

® Pliny, H. N.j lib. xviii., cap. iv.; Columella, De re rusiica, lib. i., praefatio 
Politics, 1265a. 


Slave la- 
bour is 
the dear- 
est of all 


At present 
sugar and 
tobacco 
can afford 
slave cul- 
tivation, 
com 
cannot. 



The slaves 
were suc- 
ceeded by 
metayers, 


who are 
' ery dif- 
lerentin 
that they 
can ac- 
quire 
property. 


366 the wealth of nations 

the expence of slave cultivation. The raising of corn, it seems, in 
the present times, cannot. In the English colonies, of which the 
principal produce is corn, the far greater part of the work is done 
by freemen. The late resolution of the Quakers in Pennsylvania to 
set at liberty all their negro slaves, may satisfy us that their 
number cannot be very great. Had they made any considerable 
part of their property, such a resolution could never have been 
agreed to. In our sugar colonies, on the contrary, the whole work 
is done by slaves, and in our tobacco colonies a very great part of 
it. The profits of a sugar-plantation in any of our West Indian 
colonies are generally much greater than those of any other cul- 
tivation that is known either in Europe or America: And the profits 
of a tobacco plantation, though inferior to those of sugar, are su- 
perior to those of corn, as has already been observed.^^ Both can 
afford the expence of slave cultivation, but sugar can afford it still 
better than tobacco. The number of negroes accordingly is much 
greater, in proportion to that of whites, in our sugar than in our 
tobacco colonies. 

To the slave cultivators of ancient times, gradually succeeded a 
species of farmers known at present in France by the name of 
metayers. They are called in Latin, Coloni Partiarii. They have 
been so long in disuse in England that at present I know no Eng- 
lish name for them. The proprietor furnished them with the seed, 
cattle, and instruments of husbandry, the whole stock, in short, 
necessary for cultivating the farm. The produce was divided 
equally between the proprietor and the farmer, after setting aside 
what was judged necessary for keeping up the stock, which was 
restored to the proprietor when the farmer either quitted, or was 
turned out of the farm.^^ 

Land occupied by such tenants is properly cultivated at the ex- 
pence of the proprietor, as much as that occupied by slaves. There 
is, however, one very essential difference between them. Such ten- 
ants, being freemen, are capable of acquiring property, and having 
a certain proportion of the produce of the land, they have a plain 
interest that the whole produce should be as great as possible, in 
order that their own proportion may be so. A slave, on the con- 
trary, who can acquire nothing but his maintenance, consults his 
own ease by making the land produce as little as possible over and 
above that maintenance. It is probable that it was partly upon 
account of this advantage, and partly upon account of the en- 
croachments which the sovereign, always jealous of the great lords, 

^Raynal, Histoire philosophique (Amsterdam ed.), tom. vi., pp. 368-388. 

“Above, p. 158; Lectures, p. 225. Ibid., pp. 100, loi. 



DISCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE 3^7 

gradually encouraged their villains to make upon their authority, 
and which seem at last to have been such as rendered this species 
of servitude altogether inconvenient, that tenure in villanage 
gradually wore out through the greater part of Europe. The time 
and manner, however, in which so important a revolution was 
brought about, is one of the most obscure points in modern his- 
tory. The church of Rome claims great merit in it; and it is cer- 
tain that so early as the twelfth century, Alexander III.^*^ pub- 
lished a bull for the general emancipation of slaves. It seems, how- 
ever, to have been rather a pious exhortation, than a law to which 
exact obedience was required from the faithful. Slavery continued 
to take place almost universally for several centuries afterwards, 
till it was gradually abolished by the joint operation of the two in- 
terests above mentioned, that of the proprietor on the one hand, 
and that of the sovereign on the other. A villain enfranchised, and 
at the same time allowed to continue in possession of the land, 
having no stock of his own, could cultivate it only by means of 
what the landlord advanced to him, and must, therefore, have been 
what the French call a metayer. 

It could never, however, be the interest even of this last species 
of cultivators to lay out, in the further improvement of the land, 
any part of the little stock which they might save from their own 
share of the produce, because the lord, who laid out nothing, was 
to get one-half of whatever it produced. The tithe, which is but a 
tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great hindrance to im- 
proveiilent. A tax, therefore, which amounted to one-half, must 
have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the interest of a me- 
tayer to make the land produce as much as could be brought out 
of it by means of the stock furnished by the proprietor; but it 
-^ould never be his interest to mix any part of his own with it. In 
France, where five parts out of six of the whole kingdom are said 
to be still occupied by this species of cultivators,^^ the proprietors 
complain that their metayers take every opportunity of employing 
the master’s cattle rather in carriage than in cultivation; because 
in the one case they get the whole profits to themselves, in the 
other they share them with their landlord. This species of tenants 
still subsists in some parts of Scotland. They are called steel-bow^® 

^*Raynal, Histoire pMlosopJngtie (Amsterdam ed.), tom. i., p. 12. In Lec- 
tures, pp. loi, 102, Innocent III. appears in error for Alexander III. 

“Probably Quesnay’s estimate; cp. his article on “Fermiers” in the En- 
cyclopidie, reprinted in his (Euvres, ed. Oncken, 1888, pp. 160, 171. 

“ (iarnier is certainly wrong in suggesting in his note, “ce nom vient prob- 
ablement de la maniere dont ils etaient autrefois armes en guerre.”— Rec^er- 
ches, etc., tom. ii., p. 428. “Bow” is the farming stock; “steel” is said to in- 
dicate the nature of the contract, and eisern vieh and bestia ferri are quoted 


But they 
could 
have no 
interest to 
employ 
stock in 
improve- 
ment. 



Metayers 
were fol- 
lowed by 
farmers, 
who 

sometimes 
find it to 
their in- 
terest to 
improve 
when they 
have a 
lease, but 
leases 
were long 
insecure. 


The 

forty- 

shilling 

free 

holder 

vote in 

England 

centri- 


sts the wealth of nations 

tenants. Those ancient English tenants, who are said by Chief 
Baron Gilbert and Doctor Blackstone to have been rather bailiffs 
of the landlord than farmers properly so called, were probably 
of the same kind.^"^ 

To this species of tenancy succeeded, though by very slow de- 
grees, farmers properly so called, who cultivated the land with 
their own stock, paying a rent certain to the landlord. When such 
farmers have a lease for a term of years, they may sometimes find 
it for their interest to lay out part of their capital in the further 
improvement of the farm; because they may sometimes expect to 
recover it, with a large profit, before the expiration of the lease. 
The possession even of such farmers, however, was long extremely 
precarious, and still is so in many parts of Europe. They could be- 
fore the expiration of their term be legally outed of their lease, by 
a new purchaser; in England, even by the fictitious action of a 
common recovery. If they were turned out illegally by the violence 
of their master, the action by which they obtained redress was ex- 
tremely imperfect. It did not always re-instate them in the posses- 
sion of the land, but gave them damages which never amounted to 
the real loss. Even in England, the country perhaps of Europe 
where the yeomanry has always been most respected, it was not 
till about the 14th of Henry the Vllth that the action of ejectment 
was invented,^® by which the tenant recovers, not damages only 
but possession, and in which his claim is not necessarily concluded 
by the uncertain decision of a single assize. This action has been 
found so effectual a remedy that, in the modern practice, when the 
landlord has occasion to sue for the possession of the land, he sel- 
dom makes use of the actions which properly belong to him as 
landlord, the writ of right or the writ of entry, but sues in the 
name of his tenant, by the writ of ejectment. In England, there- 
fore, the security of the tenant is equal to that of the proprietor. 
In England besides a lease for life of forty shillings a year value is 
a freehold, and entitles the lessee to vote for a member of parlia- 
ment; and as a great part of the yeomanry have freeholds of this 
kind, the whole order becomes respectable to their landlords on ac- 
count of the political consideration which this gives them.^® There 
is, I believe, no-where in Europe, except in England, any instance 

as parallels by Cosmo Innes, Lectures on Scotch Legal Antiquities, 1872, pp. 
24 S> 266. 

Gilbert, Treatise of Tenures, 3rd ed., i 757 > PP- 34 and 54; Blackstone, 
Commentaries, vol, ii., pp. 141, 142. The whole paragraph follows Lectures, 
p. 226, rather closely. 

“M. Bacon, New Abridgment of the Law, 3rd ed., 1768, vol ii., p. 160, s.v. 
Ejectment, cp Lectures, p. 227. 

“ Blackstone, Commentaries, iii., 197. ^Lectures, pp. 227-228 



DISCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE 3^9 

of the tenant building upon the land of which he had no lease, and 
trusting that the honour of his landlord would take no advantage 
of so important an improvement. Those laws and customs so fa- 
vourable to the yeomanry, have perhaps contributed more to the 
present grandeur of England, than all their boasted regulations of 
commerce taken together. 

The law which secures the longest leases against successors of 
every kind is, so far as I know, peculiar to Great Britain. It was 
introduced into Scotland so early as 1449, a law of James the 
Ild.^^ Its beneficial influence, however, has been much obstructed 
by entails; the heirs of entail being generally restrained from let- 
ting leases for any long term of years, frequently for more than 
one year. A late act of parliament has, in this respect, somewhat 
slackened their fetters, though they are still by muA too strait. In 
Scotland, besides, as no leasehold gives a vote for a member of 
parliament, the yeomanry are upon this account less respectable to 
their landlords than in England. 

In other parts of Europe, after it was found convenient to se- 
cure tenants both against heirs and purchasers, the term of their 
security was still limited to a very short period; in France, for 
example, to nine years from the commencement of the lease. It has 
in that country, indeed, been lately extended to twenty-seven, a 
period still too short to encourage the tenant to make the most im- 
portant improvements. The proprietors of land were anciently the 
legislators of every part of Europe. The laws relating to land, 
therefore, were all calculated for what they supposed the interest 
of the proprietor. It was for his interest, they had imagined, that 
no lease granted by any of his predecessors should hinder him from 
enjoying, during a long term of years, the full value of his land. 
Avarice and injustice are always shortsighted, and they did not 
foresee how much this regulation must obstruct improvement, and 
thereby hurt in the long-run the real interest of the landlord.^^ 
The farmers too, besides paying the rent, were anciently, it was 
supposed, bound to perform a great number of services to the land- 
lord, which were seldom either specified in the lease, or regulated 
by any precise rule, but by the use and wont of the manor or 
barony. These services, therefore, being almost entirely arbitrary, 
subjected the tenant to many vexations. In Scotland the abolition 
of all services, not precisely stipulated in the lease,^® has in the 

Acts of 1449, c. 6, “ordained for the safety and favour of the poor people 
that labours the ground ” 

10 Geo. III., c. SI. “ Below, p. 643 

^ Lectures, pp. 226, 327. “ 20 Geo. II., c. 50, § 21. 


butes to 
the se- 
curity of 
the 

farmer. 


The law 
of Scot- 
land is not 
quite so 
favour- 
able. 


In the rest 
of Europe 
the farmer 
is less se- 
cure. 


Custom- 
ser- 
vices were 
vexatious 
to the 
farmer, 



and so 
also were 
compul- 
sory la- 
bour on 
the roadsj 

purvey- 

ance 


and tal- 
lages. 


Even un- 
der the 
best laws 


370 the wealth of nations 

course of a few years very much altered for the better the condi- 
tion of the yeomanry of that country. 

The public services to which the yeomanry were bound, were 
not less arbitrary than the private ones. To make and maintain the 
high roads, a servitude which still subsists, I believe, every-where, 
though with different degrees of oppression in different countries, 
was not the only one. When the king’s troops, when his household 
or his officers of any kind passed through any part of the country, 
the yeomanry were bound to provide them with horses, carriages, 
and provisions, at a price regulated by the purveyor. Great Brit- 
ain is, I believe, the only monarchy in Europe where the oppres- 
sion of purveyance has been entirely abolished. It still subsists in 
France and Germany. 

The public taxes to which they were subject were as irregular 
and oppressive as the services. The ancient lords, though extremely 
unwilling to grant themselves any pecuniary aid to their sove- 
reign, easily allowed him to tallage, as they called it, their ten- 
ants,^® and had not knowledge enough to foresee how much this 
must in the end affect their own revenue. The taille, as it still sub- 
sists in France, may serve as an example of those ancient tallages. 
It is a tax upon the supposed profits of the farmer, which they 
estimate by the stock that he has upon the farm. It is his interest, 
therefore, to appear to have as little as possible, and consequently 
to employ as little as possible in its cultivation, and none in its 
improvement. Should any stock happen to accumulate in the 
hands of a French farmer, the taille is almost equal to a prohibi- 
tion of its ever being employed upon the land. This tax besides is 
supposed to dishonour whoever is subject to it, and to degrade 
him below, not only the rank of a gentleman, but that of a burg- 
her, and whoever rents the lands of another becomes subject to it. 
No gentleman, nor even any burgher who has stock, will submit 
to this degradation. This tax, therefore, not only hinders the stock 
which accumulates upon the land from being employed in its im- 
provement, but drives away all other stock from it. The ancient 
tenths and fifteenths,^® so usual in England in former times, seem 
so far as they af ected the land, to have been taxes of the same na- 
ture with the taille. 

Under all these discouragements, little improvement could be 
expected from the occupiers of land. That order of people, with all 
the liberty and security which law can give, must always improve 

^Lectures, p. 227. «Ed. i reads “that.” 

Origmally tenths and fifteenths of movable goods; subsequently fixed 
^ms levied from the parishes, and raised by them like other local rates; see • 
Cannan, History of Local Rates, 1896, pp. 13-14, 18-20, 22 note, 23 note. 



DISCOURAGEMENT OP AGRICULTURE 37 i 
under great disadvantages. The farmer compared with the pro- 
prietor, is as a merchant who trades with borrowed money com- 
pared with one who trades with his own. The stock of both may 
improve, but that of the one, with only equal good conduct, must 
always improve more slowly than that of the other, on account of 
the large share of the profits which is consumed by the interest of 
the loan. The lands cultivated by the farmer must, in the same 
manner, with only equal good conduct, be improved more slowly 
than those cultivated by the proprietor; on account of the large 
share of the produce which is consumed in the rent, and which, 
had the farmer been proprietor, he might have employed in the 
further improvement of the land.^® The station of a farmer besides 
is, from the nature of things, inferior to that of a proprietor. 
Through the greater part of Europe the yeomanry are regarded as 
an inferior rank of people, even to the better sort of tradesmen and 
mechanics, and in all parts of Europe to the great merchants and 
master manufacturers. It can seldom happen, therefore, that a 
man of any considerable stock should quit the superior, in order 
to place himself in an inferior station. Even in the present state 
of Europe, therefore, little stock is likely to go from any other 
profession to the improvement of land in the way of farming. 
More does perhaps in Great Britain than in any other country, 
though even there the great stocks which are, in some places, em- 
ployed in farming, have generally been acquired by farming, the 
trade, perhaps, in which of all others stock is commonly acquired 
most slowly. After small proprietors, however, rich and great farm- 
ers are, in every country, the principal improvers. There are more 
such perhaps in England than in any other European monarchy. 
In the republican governments of Holland and of Berne in Switzer- 
land, the farmers are said to be not inferior to those of England.®^ 

The ancient policy of Europe was, over and above all this, un- 
favourable to the improvement and cultivation of land, whether 
carried on by the proprietor or by the farmer; first, by the general 
prohibition of the exportation of com without a special licence, 
which seems to have been a very universal regulation; and sec- 
ondly, by the restraints which were laid upon the inland com- 
merce, not only of corn but of almost every other part of the pro- 
duce of the farm, by the absurd laws against engrossers, regraters, 
and forestallers, and by the privileges of fairs and markets.^^ It 
has already been observed in what manner the prohibition of the 

^ Lectures f p. 226. 

^Essays on Husbandry (by Walter Harte), 1764? PP* 69-80. 

^ Below, pp. 490-500. 


the farm- 
er is at a 
disad- 
vantage 
inim- 
provinc, 


but large 

farmers 

are the 

principal 

improvers 

after 

small pro- 
prietors 

The com- 
mon pro- 
hibition 
of the ex- 
port of 
corn and 
the re- 
straints 
on inter- 
nal trade 



372 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


in agri- 
cultural 
produce 
were fur- 
ther dis- 
courage- 
mentsto 
agricul- 
ture. 


exportation of com, together with some encouragement given to 
the importation of foreign com, obstructed the cultivation of an- 
cient Italy, naturally the most fertile country in Europe, and at 
that time the seat of the greatest empire in the world.^^ To what 
degree such restraints upon the inland commerce of this commod- 
ity, joined to the general prohibition of exportation, must have 
discouraged the cultivation of countries less fertile, and less fa- 
vourably circumstanced, it is not perhaps very easy to imagine. 


^ Above, p. 150; Lectures, p. 229, 



CHAPTER III 


OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF CITIES AND TOWNS, AFTER THE 
FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE 

The inhabitants of cities and towns were, after the fall of the Ro- 
man empire, not more favoured than those of the country. They 
consisted, indeed, of a very different order of people from the first 
inhabitants of the ancient republics of Greece and Italy. These 
last were composed chiefly of the proprietors of lands, among 
whom the public territory was originally divided, and who found 
it convenient to build their houses in the neighbourhood of one 
another, and to surround them with a wall, for the sake of com- 
mon defence. After the fall of the Roman empire, on the contrary, 
the proprietors of land seem generally to have lived in fortified 
castles on their own estates, and in the midst of their own tenants 
and dependants. The towns were chiefly inhabited by tradesmen 
and mechanics, who seem in those days to have been of servile, or 
very nearly of servile condition. The privfleges which we find 
granted by ancient charters to the inhabitants of some of the prin- 
cipal towns in Europe, sufficiently shew what they were before 
those grants. The people to whom it is granted as a privilege, that 
they might give away their own daughters in marriage without the 
consent of their lord, that upon their death their own children, and 
not their lord, should succeed to their goods, and that they might 
dispose of their own effects by will, must, before those grants, 
have been either altogether, or very nearly in the same state of 
villanage with the occupiers of land in the country. 

They seem, indeed, to have been a very poor, mean set of peo- 
ple, who used to travel about with their goods from place to place, 
and from fair to fair, like the hawkers and pedlars of the present 
times.^ In all the different countries of Europe then, in the same 
manner as in several of the Tartar governments of Asia at present, 
taxes used to be levied upon the persons and goods of travellers. 


The 
towns- 
men were 
not at 
first 

favoured 
more than 
the coun- 
trymen. 


They 
were ver3i 
nearly of 
servile 
condition. 


^Lectures, p. 233. 
373 



but ar- 
rived at 
liberty 
much 
earlier 
than the 
country 
people, 
acquiring 
the farm 
of their 
town, 


374 THE WEAL^gH OF NATIONS 

when they passed through certain manors, when they went over 
certain bridges, when they carried about their goods from place to 
place in a fair, when they erected in it a booth or stall to sell them 
in. These different taxes were known in England by the names of 
passage, pontage, lastage, and stallage. Sometimes the king, some- 
times a great lord, who had, it seems, upon some occasions, au- 
thority to do this, would grant to particular traders, to such par- 
ticularly as lived in their own demesnes, a general exemption from 
such taxes. Such traders, though in other respects of servile, or 
very nearly of servile condition, were upon this account called 
Free-traders. They in return usually paid to their protector a sort 
of annual poll-tax. In those days protection was seldom granted 
without a valuable consideration, and this tax might, perhaps, be 
considered as compensation for what their patrons might lose by 
their exemption from other taxes. At first, both those poll-taxes 
and those exemptions seem to have been altogether personal, and 
to have affected only particular individuals, during either their 
lives, or the pleasure of their protectors. In the very imperfect ac- 
counts which have been published from Domesday-book, of sev- 
eral of the towns of England, mention is frequently made some- 
times of the tax which particular burghers paid, each of them, 
either to the king, or to some other great lord, for this sort of pro- 
tection; and sometimes of the general amount only of all those 
taxes.^ 

But how servile soever may have been originally the condition 
of the inhabitants of the ^ towns, it appears evidently, that they 
arrived at liberty and independency much earlier than the occu- 
piers of land in the country. That part of the king’s revenue which 
arose from such poll-taxes in any particular town, used commonly 
to be let in farm, during a term of years for a rent certain, some- 
times to the sheriff of the county, and sometimes to other persons. 
The burghers themselves frequently got credit enough to be ad- 
mitted to farm the revenues of this sort which arose out of their 
own town, they becoming jointly and severally answerable for the 
whole rent."^ To let a farm in this manner was quite agreeable to 

^See Brady’s historical treatise of Cities and Burroughs, p. 3, &c. Robert 
Brady, Historical Treatise of Cities and Burghs or Boroughs, 2nd ed., 1711. 
See, for the statements as to the position of townsmen and traders contained 
in these two paragraphs, esp. pp. 16, 18, and Appendix, p. 8. Cp. Hume, His- 
tory, ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 205, where Domesday and Brady are both men- 
tioned. The note appears first in ed. 2. 

^ Ed. I does not contain “the.” 

*See Madox Firma Burgi, 1726, p. 18. also Madox, History and Antiquities 
of the Exchequer, chap. 10. sect. v. p. 223, first edition 1711. But the state- 
ment in the text above that the farm was in place of poll taxes is not sup- 



375 


RISE OF TOWNS 

the usual oeconomy of, I believe, the sovereigns of all the different 
countries of Europe; who used frequently to let whole manors to 
all the tenants of those manors, they becoming jointly and sever- 
ally answerable for the whole rent; ^ but in return being allowed 
to collect it in their own way, and to pay it into the king’s ex- 
chequer by the hands of their own bailiff, and being thus alto- 
gether freed from the insolence of the kings officers; a circum- 
stance in those days regarded as of the greatest importance. 

At first, the farm of the town w^as probably let to the burghers, 
in the same manner as it had been to other farmers, for a term 
of years only. In process of time, however, it seems to have be- 
come the general practice to grant it to them in fee, that is for 
ever, reserving a rent certain never afterwards to be augmented. 
The payment having thus become perpetual, the exemptions, in 
return for which it was made, naturally became perpetual too. 
Those exemptions, therefore, ceased to be personal, and could not 
afterwards be considered as belonging to individuals as individuals, 
but as burghers of a particular burgh, which upon this account, 
was called a Free burgh, for the same reason that they had been 
called Free-burghers or Free-traders. 

Along with this grant, the important privileges above men- 
tioned, that they might give away their own daughters in marriage, 
that their children should succeed to them, and that they might 
dispose of their own effects by will, were generally bestowed upon 
the burghers of the town to whom it was given. Whether such 
privileges had before been usually granted along with the freedom 
of trade, to particular burghers, as individuals, I know not. I 
reckon it not improbable that they were, though I cannot produce 
any direct evidence of it. But however this may have been, the 
principal attributes of villanage and slavery being thus taken 
away from them, they now, at least, became really free in our pres- 
ent sense of the word Freedom. 

Nor was this all. They were generally at the same time erected 
into a commonalty or corporation, with the privilege of having 
magistrates and a town-council of their own, of making bye-laws 
for their own government, of building walls for their own defence, 
and of reducing all their inhabitants under a sort of military disci- 

ported by Firma Burgi, p. 251, where Madox says the “yearly ferme of towns 
arose out of certain locata or demised things that yielded issues or profit,” 
e.g.f assised rents, pleas, perquisites, custom of goods, fairs, markets, stallage, 
aldermanries, tolls and wharfage. It was only if these fell short of the farm, 
that a direct contribution from the townsmen would be levied. The note ap- 
pears first in ed. 2. 

® An instance is given in Firma Burgh P* 21. 


first for a 
term of 
years and 
after- 
wards in 
perpe- 
tuity, 


as well as 
other 
privileges 
equiva- 
lent to 
freedom, 


and a 
govern- 
ment of 
their own. 



It seems 
strange 
that sov- 
ereigns 
should 
have 
aban- 
doned the 
prospect 
of in- 
creased 
revenue 
and have 
erected 
indepen- 
dent re- 
publics, 

but the 
towns 
were the 
natural 
allies of 
the sover- 
eign 
against 
the lords. 


376 the wealth of nations 

pline, by obliging them to watch and ward; that is, as anciently 
understood, to guard and defend those walls against all attacks 
and surprises by night as well as by day. In England they were 
generally exempted from suit to the hundred and county courts; 
and all such pleas as should arise among them, the pleas of the 
crown excepted, were left to the decision of their own magistrates. 
In other countries much greater and more extensive jurisdictions 
were frequently granted to them.® 

It might, probably, be necessary to grant to such towns as were 
admitted to farm their own revenues, some sort of compulsive 
jurisdiction to oblige their own citizens to make payment. In those 
disorderly times it might have been extremely inconvenient to have 
left them to seek this sort of justice from any other tribunal. But 
it must seem extraordinary that the sovereigns of all the different 
countries of Europe, should have exchanged in this manner for a 
rent certain, never more to be augmented, that branch of their 
revenue, which was, perhaps, of all others the most likely to be 
improved by the natural course of things, without either expence 
or attention of their own: and that they should, besides, have in 
this manner voluntarily erected a sort of independent republics in 
the heart of their own dominions. 

In order to understand this, it must be remembered, that in 
those days the sovereign of perhaps no country in Europe was able 
to protect, through the whole extent of his dominions, the weaker 
part of his subjects from the oppression of the great lords. Those 
whom the law could not protect, and who were not strong enough 
to defend themselves, were obliged either to have recourse to the 
protection of some great lord, and in order to obtain it to become 
either his slaves or vassals; or to enter into a league of mutual de- 
fence for the common protection of one another. The inhabitants 
of cities and burghs, considered as single individuals, had no power 
to defend themselves; but by entering into a league of mutual de- 
fence with their neighbours, they were capable of making no con- 
temptible resistance. The lords despised the burghers, whom they 
considered not only as of a different order, but as a parcel of 
emancipated slaves, almost of a different species from themselves. 


®See Madox Pinna Burgi: See also Pfeffel in the remarkable events under 
Frederic II. and his successors of the house of Suabia. This note appears first 
in ed. 2. In Pfeffel's Nouvel Abrege chronologique de Vhistom et du droit 
public d^AUemagnOy “Ev&iements remarquables sous Frederic II.” is a 
chapter heading, and subsequent chapters are headed in the same way. For 
the references to the power of the towns, see the index, s.v, Villes at the end of 
tom. i. 

’^Lectures, p. 40. 



RISE OF TOWNS 377 

The wealth of the burghers never failed to provoke their envy and 
indignation, and they plundered them upon every occasion without 
mercy or remorse. The burghers naturally hated and feared the 
lords. The king hated and feared them too; but though perhaps 
he might despise, he had no reason either to hate or fear the 
burghers. Mutual interest, therefore, disposed them to support the 
king, and the king to support them against the lords. They were 
the enemies of his enemies, and it was his interest to render them 
as secure and independent of those enemies as he could. By grant- 
ing them magistrates of their own, the privilege of making bye- 
laws for their own government, that of building walls for their own 
defence, and that of reducing all their inhabitants under a sort of 
military discipline, he gave them all the means of security and in- 
dependency of the barons w^hich it was in his power to bestow. 
Without the establishment of some regular government of this 
kind, without some authority to compel their inhabitants to act 
according to some certain plan or system, no voluntary league of 
mutual defence could either have afforded them any permanent 
security, or have enabled them to give the king any considerable 
support. By granting them the farm of their town in fee, he took 
away from those whom he wished to have for his friends, and, if 
one may say so, for his allies, all ground of jealousy and suspicion 
that he was ever afterwards to oppress them, either by raising the 
farm rent of their towns, or by granting it to some other farmer. 

The princes who lived upon the worst terms with their barons, 
seem accordingly to have been the most liberal in grants of this 
kind to their burghs. King John of England, for example, appears 
to have been a most munificent benefactor to his towns.® Philip 
the First of France lost all authority over his barons. Towards the 
end of his reign, his son Lewis, known afterwards by the name of 
Lewis the Fat, consulted, according to Father Daniel, with the 
bishops of the royal demesnes, concerning the most proper means 
of restraining the violence of the great lords.® Their advice con- 
sisted of two different proposals. One was to erect a new order of 

® See Madox Firma Bufii, pp. 35, 130. The note is not in ed. i. 

“L’excommunication de Philippe I. et son inapplication aux affaires avai- 
ent presque mine toute son autorite en France. . . . Les plus puissants vas- 
saux de France etaient devenus plus que jamais indociles a Fegard du sou- 
verain. . . . Louis le Gros, a qui Philippe son pfere avait abandonnd la con- 
duite de Fetat sur les dernieres annees de sa vie, delibera avec les ^veques du 
domaine royal, des moyens de remedier a ces maux, et imagina avec eux une 
nouvelle police pour la levee des troupes, et une nouvelle forme de justice 
dans les ^les pour empecher Fimpunite des crimes.”--G. Daniel, Histoire de 
France, 1755, vol. iii., pp. 512-513. A description of the new institutions fol- 
lows, pp. 513-514. 


The sov- 
ereigns 
who 

quarrelled 
most with 
the 

barons 
were the 
most lib- 
eral to 
the 

towns. 



The city 
militia 
was often 
ableio 
over- 
power the 
neigh- 
bouring 
lords, as 
in Italy 
and Swit- 
zerland. 


In France 
and Eng- 
land the 
cities 
could not 
be taxed 
without 
their own 
consent. 


37S the wealth of nations 

jurisdiction by establishing magistrates and a town council in 
every considerable town of his demesnes. The other was to form a 
new militia, by making the inhabitants of those towns, under the 
command of their own magistrates, march out upon proper oc- 
casions to the assistance of the king. It is from this period, accord- 
ing to the French antiquarians,’ that we are to date the institu- 
tion of the magistrates and councils of cities in France. It was 
during the unprosperous reigns of the princes of the house of 
Suabia that the greater part of the free towns of Germany received 
the first grants of their privileges, and that the famous Hanseatic 
league first became formidable.” 

The militia of the cities seems, in those times, not to have been 
inferior to that of the country, and as they could be more readily 
assembled upon any sudden occasion, they frequently had the ad- 
vantage in their disputes with the neighbouring lords. In coun- 
tries, such as Italy and Switzerland, in which, on account either of 
their distance from the principal seat of government, of the nat- 
ural strength of the country itself, or of some other reason, the 
sovereign came to lose the whole of his authority, the cities gen- 
erally became independent republics, and conquered all the no- 
bility in their neighbourhood; obliging them to pull down their 
castles in the country, and to live, like other peaceable inhabit- 
ants, in the city. This is the short history of the republic of Berne, 
as well as of several other cities in Switzerland. If you except 
Venice, for of that city the history is somewhat different, it is the 
history of all the considerable Italian republics, of which so great 
a number arose and perished, between the end of the twelfth and 
the begmning of the sixteenth century. 

In countries such as France or England, where the authority of 
the sovereign, though frequently very low, never was destroyed 
altogether, the cities had no opportunity of becoming entirely in- 
dependent. They became, however, so considerable, that the sove- 
reign could impose no tax upon them, besides the stated farm- 
rent of the town, without their own consent. They were, therefore, 
called upon to send deputies to the general assembly of the states 
of the kingdom, where they might join with the clergy and the 
barons in granting, upon urgent occasions, some extraordinary 
aid to the king. Being generally too more favourable to his power, 
their deputies seem, sometimes, to have been employed by him as 

“Possibly Du Cange (who is referred to in the margin of Daniel, p 514, 
and by Hume, History, ed. 1773, vol, ii., p. 118), Ghssarium, s.v. Commune, 
commuma, etc., ‘ Primus vero ejus modi Communias in Francia Ludov VII 
[ ? VI] rex multiplicavit et auxit.” 

^See Pfeffel. Reference above, p. 376 note. The note is not in ed. i. 



RISE OF TOWNS 379 

a counter-balance in those assemblies to the authority of the great 
lords.^" Hence the origin of the representation of burghs in the 
states general of all the great monarchies in Europe. 

Order and good government, and along with them the liberty 
and security of individuals, were, in this manner, established in 
cities, at a time when the occupiers of land in the country were ex- 
posed to every sort of violence. But men in this defenceless state 
naturally content themselves with their necessary subsistence; be- 
cause to acquire more might only tempt the injustice of their op- 
pressors. On the contrary, when they are secure of enjoying the 
fruits of their industry, they naturally exert it to better their con- 
dition and to acquire not only the necessaries, but the convenien- 
cies and elegancies of life. That industry, therefore, which aims at 
something more than necessary subsistence, was established in 
cities long before it was commonly practised by the occupiers of 
land in the country. If in the hands of a poor cultivator, oppressed 
with the servitude of villanage, some little stock should accumu- 
late, he would naturally conceal it with great care from his master, 
to whom it would otherwise have belonged, and take the first op- 
portunity of running away to a town. The law was at that time so 
indulgent to the inhabitants of towns, and so desirous of dimin- 
ishing the authority of the lords over those of the country, that if 
he could conceal himself there from the pursuit of his lord for a 
year, he was free for everP Whatever stock, therefore, accumu- 
lated in the hands of the industrious part of the inhabitants of 
the country, naturally took refuge in cities, as the only sanctu- 
aries in which it could be secure to the person that acquired it. 

The inhabitants of a city, it is true, must always ultimately de- 
rive their subsistence, and the whole materials and means of their 
industry, from the country. But those of a city, situated near 
either the seacoast or the banks of a navigable river, are not neces- 
sarily confined to derive them from the country in their neighbour- 
hood. They have a much wider range, and may draw them from 
the most remote corners of the world, either in exchange for the 
manufactured produce of their own industry, or by performing the 
office of carriers between distant countries, and exchanging the 
produce of one for that of another. A city might in this manner 
grow up to great wealth and splendor, while not only the country in 
its neighbourhood, but all those to which it traded, were in poverty 
and wretchedness. Each of those countries, perhaps, taken singly, 

“Ed. I places “in those assemblies” here instead of in the line above; see 
Lectures, p. 41. 

^Lectures, p. 40. 


In conse- 
quence of 
this great- 
er security 
of the 
towns in- 
dustry 
flouri^ed 
and stock 
accumu- 
lated 
there ear- 
lier than 
in the 
country. 


Cities on 
the sea- 
coast or 
on navig- 
able rivers 
are not 
dependent 
on the 
neigh- 
bouring 
country. 



The cities 
of Italy 
were the 
first to 
grow 
opulent, 
being 
centrally 
stuated 
and bene- 
fited by 
the cru- 
sades. 


Thedties 
imported 
manufac- 
tures and 
luxuries 
from rich- 
er coun- 
tries, 
whidi 
were paid 
for by 
rude pro- 
duce. 


Demand 
for such 
manufac- 
tured ar- 
tides hav- 
ing be- 
come con- 


380 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

could afford it but a small part, either of its subsistence, or of its 
employment; but all of them taken together could afford it both a 
great subsistence and a great emplo3mient. There were, however, 
within the narrow circle of the commerce of those times, some 
countries that were opulent and industrious. Such was the Greek 
empire as long as it subsisted, and that of the Saracens during the 
reigns of the Abassides. Such too was Egypt till it was conquered 
by the Turks, some part of the coast of Barbary, and all those 
provinces of Spain which were under the government of the Moors. 

The cities of Italy seem to have been the first in Europe which 
were raised by commerce to any considerable degree of opulence. 
Italy lay in the centre of what was at that time the improved and 
civilized part of the world. The crusades, too, though, by the great 
waste of stock and destruction of inhabitants which they occas- 
ioned, they must necessarily have retarded the progress of the 
greater part of Europe, were extremely favourable to that of some 
Italian cities. The great armies which marched from all parts to 
the conquest of the Holy Land, gave extraordinary encouragement 
to the shipping of Venice, Genoa, and Pisa, sometimes in trans- 
porting them thither, and always in supplying them with provis- 
ions. They were the commissaries, if one may say so, of those 
armies; and the most destructive frenzy that ever befel the Euro- 
pean nations,^^ was a source of opulence to those republics. 

The inhabitants of trading cities, by importing the improved 
manufactures and expensive luxuries of richer countries, afforded 
some food to the vanity of the great proprietors, who eagerly pur- 
chased them with great quantities of the rude produce of their own 
lands. The commerce of a great part of Europe in those times, ac- 
cordingly, consisted chiefly in the exchange of their own rude, for 
the manufactured produce of more civilized nations. Thus the wool 
of England used to be exchanged for the wines of France, and the 
fine cloths of Flanders, in the same manner as the corn of Poland 
is at this day exchanged for the wines and brandies of France, and 
for the silks and velvets of France and Italy. 

A taste for the finer and more improved manufactures, was in 
this manner introduced by foreign commerce into countries where 
no such works were carried on. But when this taste became so gen- 
eral as to occasion a considerable demand, the merchants, in order 
to save the expence of carriage, naturally endeavoured to establish 

^*‘‘The most signal and most durable monument of human folly that has 
yet appeared in any age or nation,” Hume, History^ ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 292 ,* 
“this universal frenzy,” ibid., p. 298, of ed. 1770, vol. i., p. 327, but in his ist 
ed. Hume wrote “universal madness.” 

“ Misprinted “in” in ed. 5. 



RISE OF TOWNS 3^1 

some manufactures of the same kind in their own country. Hence 
the origin of the first manufactures for distant sale that seem to 
have been established in the western provinces of Europe, after the 
fall of the Roman empire. 

No large country, it must be observed, ever did or could subsist 
without some sort of manufactures being carried on in it; and when 
it is said of any such country that it has no manufactures, it must 
always be understood of the finer and more improved, or of such as 
are fit for distant sale. In every large country, both the clothing and 
houshold furniture of the far greater part of the people, are the 
produce of their own industry. This is even more universally the 
case in those poor countries which are commonly said to have no 
manufactures, than in those rich ones that are said to abound in 
them. In the latter, you will generally find, both in the clothes and 
houshold furniture of the lowest rank of people, a much greater pro- 
portion of foreign productions than in the former. 

Those manufactures which are fit for distant sale, seem to have 
been introduced into different countries in two different ways. 

Sometimes they have been introduced, in the manner above men- 
tioned, by the violent operation, if one may say so, of the stocks of 
particular merchants and undertakers, who established them in 
imitation of some foreign manufactures of the same kind. Such 
manufactures, therefore, are the offspring of foreign commerce, and 
such seem to have been the ancient manufactures of silks, velvets, 
and brocades, which flourished in Lucca, during the thirteenth 
century. They were banished from thence by the tyranny of one of 
MachiaveFs heroes, Castruccio Castracani. In 1310, nine hundred 
families were driven out of Lucca, of whom thirty-one retired to 
Venice, and offered to introduce there the silk manufacture.^^ Their 
offer was accepted; many privileges were conferred upon them, and 
they began the manufacture with three hundred workmen. Such too 
seem to have been the manufactures of fine cloths that anciently 
flourished in Flanders, and which were introduced into England in 
the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth; and such are the present 
silk manufactures of Lyons and Spital-fields. Manufactures intro- 
duced in this manner are generally employed upon foreign mater- 
ials, being imitations of foreign manufactures. When the Vene- 

Ed. I reads “that were introduced into Venice in the beginning of.” 

See Sandi Istoria Civile de Vinezia, Part 2 vol. i. page 247, and 256. Vet- 
tor Sandi, Prmcipj di storia civile delta RepubUca di Venezia, Venice, 1755. 
The pages should be 257, 258 This note and the three sentences in the text 
which the reference covers, from “They were banished” to “three hundred 
workmen,” appear first in ed. 2. 

Ed. I reads “being in.” 


siderablc, 

their 

manufac- 
ture was 
estab- 
lished in 
the 
cities 

All coun- 
tries have 
some 
manufaC' 
tures. 


Some- 
times 
manufac 
tures for 
distant 
sale are 
intro- 
duced in 
imitation 
of foreign 
manufac- 
tures. 



Some- 
times 
they have 
grown up 
out of the 
coarser 
home 
manufac- 
tures. 


382 the wealth of nations 

tian manufacture was first established, the materials were all 
brought from Sicily and the Levant. The more ancient manufacture 
of Lucca was likewise carried on with foreign materials. The culti- 
vation of mulberry trees, and the breeding of silkworms, seem not 
to have been common in the northern parts of Italy before the six- 
teenth century. Those arts were not introduced into France till the 
reign of Charles IX.-^ The manufactures of Flanders were carried 
on chiefly with Spanish and English wool. Spanish wool was the 
material, not of the first woollen manufacture of England, but of 
the first that was fit for distant sale. More than one half the ma- 
terials of the Lyons manufacture is at this day foreign silk; when it 
was first established, the whole or very nearly the whole was so. No 
part of the materials of the Spital-fields manufacture is ever likely 
to be the produce of England. The seat of such manufactures, as 
they are generally introduced by the scheme and project of a few 
individuals, is sometimes established in a maritime city, and some- 
times in an inland town, according as their interest, judgment or 
caprice happen to determine. 

At other times manufactures for distant sale grow up naturally, 
and as it were of their own accord, by the gradual refinement of 
those houshold and coarser manufactures which must at aU times 
be carried on even in the poorest and rudest countries. Such manu- 
factures are generally employed upon the materials which the coun- 
try produces, and they seem frequently to have been first refined 
and improved in such inland countries as were, not indeed at a very 
great, but at a considerable distance from the sea coast, and some- 
times even from all water carriage. An inland country naturally fer- 
tile and easily cultivated, produces a great surplus of provisions be- 
yond what is necessary for maintaining the cultivators, and on ac- 
count of the expence of land carriage, and inconveniency of river 
navigation, it may frequently be difficult to send this surplus 
abroad. Abundance, therefore, renders provisions cheap, and en- 
courages a great number of workmen to settle in the neighbour- 
hood, who find that their industry can there procure them more of 
the necessaries and conveniencies of life than in other places. They 
work up the materials of manufacture which the land produces, and 
exchange their finished work, or what is the same thing the price of 

“ Ed. I reads “seems.” 

®®Ed. I (beginning six lines higher up), “When the Venetian manufacture 
flourished, there was not a mulberry tree, nor consequently a silkworm, in all 
Lombardy. They brought the materials from Sicily and from the Levant, the 
manufacture itself being in imitation of those carried on in the Greek empire. 
Mulberry trees were first planted in Lombardy in the beginning of the six- 
teenth century, by the encouragement of Ludovico Sforza, Duke of Milan.” 



383 


RISE OF TOWNS 

it, for more materials and provisions. They give a new value to the 
surplus part of the rude produce, by saving the expence of carrying 
it to the water side, or to some distant market; and they furnish the 
cultivators with something in exchange for it that is either useful or 
agreeable to them, upon easier terms than they could have obtained 
it before. The cultivators get a better price for their surplus prod- 
uce, and can purchase cheaper other conveniencies which they have 
occasion for. They are thus both encouraged and enabled to in- 
crease this surplus produce by a further improvement and better 
cultivation of the land; and as the fertility of the land had given 
birth to the manufacture, so the progress of the manufacture re- 
acts upon the land, and increases still further its fertility. The man- 
ufacturers first supply the neighbourhood, and afterwards, as their 
work improves and refines, more distant markets. For though neith- 
er the rude produce, nor even the coarse manufacture, could, with- 
out the greatest difficulty, support the expence of a considerable 
land carriage, the refined and improved manufacture easily may. In 
a small bulk it frequently contains the price of a great quantity of 
rude produce. A piece of fine cloth, for example, which weighs only 
eighty pounds, contains in it, the price, not only of eighty pounds 
weight of wool, but sometimes of several thousand weight of corn, 
the maintenance of the different working people, and of their im- 
mediate employers. The com, which could with difficulty have been 
carried abroad in its own shape, is in this manner virtually exported 
in that of the complete manufacture, and may easily be sent to the 
remotest comers of the world. In this manner have grown up nat- 
urally, and as it were of their own accord, the manufactures of 
Leeds, Halifax, Sheffield, Birmingham, and Wolverhampton. Such 
manufactures are the offspring of agriculture. In the modem his- 
tory of Europe, their extension and improvement have generally 
been posterior to those which were the offspring of foreign com- 
merce. England was noted for the manufacture of fine cloths made 
of Spanish wool, more than a century before any of those which now 
flourish in the places above mentioned were fit for foreign sale. The 
extension and improvement of these last could not take place but in 
consequence of the extension and improvement of agriculture, the 
last and greatest effect of foreign commerce, and of the manufac- 
tures immediately introduced by it, and which I shall now proceed 
to explain. 



CHAPTER IV 


The rise 
of towns 
benefited 
the coun- 
try, 

because 
they af- 
forded 
(i)a 
ready 
market 
for its 
produce, 


(2) be- 
cause 
merchants 
bought 
land in 
the coun- 
try and 
improved 
it, 


HOW THE COMMERCE OF THE TOWNS CONTRIBUTED TO THE IM- 

provem:ent of the country 

The increase and riches of commercial and manufacturing towns, 
contributed to the improvement and cultivation of the countries to 
which they belonged, in three different ways. 

First, by affording a great and ready market for the rude produce 
of the country, they gave encouragement to its cultivation and 
further improvement. This benefit was not even confined to the 
countries in which they were situated, but extended more or less to 
all those with which they had any dealings. To all of them they af- 
forded a market for some part either of their rude or manufactured 
produce, and consequently gave some encouragement to the indus- 
try and improvement of all. Their own country, however, on ac- 
count of its neighbourhood, necessarily derived the greatest benefit 
from this market. Its rude produce being charged with less carriage, 
the traders could pay the growers a better price for it, and yet af- 
ford it as cheap to the consumers as that of more distant countries. 

Secondly, the wealth acquired by the inhabitants of cities was 
frequently employed in purchasing such lands as were to be sold, of 
which a great part would frequently be uncultivated. Merchants 
are commonly ambitious of becoming country gentlemen, and when 
they do, they are generally the best of all improvers. A merchant is 
accustomed to employ his money chiefly in profitable projects; 
whereas a mere country gentleman is accustomed to employ it chief- 
ly in expence. The one often sees his money go from him and return 
to him again with a profit: the other, when once he parts with it, 
very seldom expects to see any more of it. Those different habits 
naturally affect their temper and disposition in every sort of busi- 
ness. A merchant is commonly a bold; a country gentleman, a timid 
undertaker. The one is not afraid to lay out at once a large capital 
upon the improvement of his land, when he has a probable prospect 
of raising the value of it in proportion to the expence. The other, if 
he has any capital, which is not always the case, seldom ventures to 

384 



TOWNS IMPROVED THE COUNTRY 3^5 

employ it in this manner. If he improves at all, it is commonly not 
with a capital, but with what he can save out of his annual revenue. 
Whoever has had the fortune to live in a mercantile town situated 
in an unimproved country, must have frequently observed how 
much more spirited the operations of merchants were in this way, 
than those of mere country gentlemen.^ The habits, besides, of or- 
der, (Economy and attention, to which mercantile business naturally 
forms a merchant, render him much fitter to execute, with profit 
and success, any project of improvement. 

Thirdly, and lastly, commerce and manufactures gradually in- 
troduced order and good government, and with them, the liberty 
and security of individuals, among the inhabitants of the country, 
who had before lived almost in a continual state of war with their 
neighbours, and of servile dependency upon their superiors. This, 
though it has been the least observed, is by far the most important 
of all their effects. Mr. Hume ^ is the only writer who, so far as I 
know, has hitherto taken notice of it. 

In a country which has neither foreign commerce, nor any of the 
finer manufactures, a great proprietor, having nothing for which he 
can exchange the greater part of the produce of his lands which is 
over and above the maintenance of the cultivators, consumes the 
whole in rustic hospitality at home. If this surplus produce is suf- 
ficient to maintain a hundred or a thousand men, he can make use 
of it in no other way than by maintaining a hundred or a thousand 
men. He is at all times, therefore, surrounded with a multitude of 
retainers and dependants, who having no equivalent to give in re- 
turn for their maintenance, but being fed entirely by his bounty, 
must obey him, for the same reason that soldiers must obey the 
prince who pays them. Before the extension of commerce and man- 
ufactures in Europe, the hospitality of the rich and the great, from 
the sovereign down to the smallest baron, exceeded every thing 
which in the present times we can easily form a notion of. West- 
minster hall was the dining-room of William Rufus, and might fre- 
quently, perhaps, not be too large for his company. It was reckoned 
a piece of magnificence in Thomas Becket, that he strowed the floor 
of his hall with dean hay or rushes in the season, in order that the 
knights and squires, who could not get seats, might not spoil their 
fine clothes when they sat down on the floor to eat their dinner.^ 
The great earl of Warwick is said to have entertained every day at 

^ Above, p. 364. 

^“Of Commerce” and “Of Luxury” in Pohtical Disccmrses, 1752, and His- 
tory ^ ed. of 1773, vol. iii., p. 400. 

® Evidently from Hume, History, ed. of 1773, vol. i., p. 384. 


and (3) 
because 
order and 
good gov- 
ernment 
were in- 
troduced. 


Before 
foreign 
commerce 
and fine 
manufac- 
tures are 
intro- 
duced 
great pro- 
pnetors 
are sur- 
rounded 
by bands 
of retain- 
ers, 



and 

tenants at 
will were 
just as de- 
pendent 
as retain- 
ers. 


The pow- 
er of the 
ancient 
barons 


3S6 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

his different manors, thirty thousand people; and though the num- 
ber here may have been exaggerated, it must, however, have been 
very great to admit of such exaggeration.*^ A hospitality nearly of 
the same kind was exercised not many years ago in many difiFerent 
parts of the highlands of Scotland. It seems to be common in all na- 
tions to whom commerce and manufactures are little known. I have 
seen, says Doctor Pocock, an Arabian chief dine in the streets of a 
town where he had come to sell his cattle, and invite all passengers, 
even common beggars, to sit down with him and partake of his 
banquet.^ 

The occupiers of land were in every respect as dependent upon 
the great proprietor as his retainers. Even such of them as were not 
in a state of villanage, were tenants at will, who paid a rent in no 
respect equivalent to the subsistence which the land afforded them. 
A crown, half a crown, a sheep, a lamb, was some years ago in the 
highlands of Scotland a common rent for lands which maintained a 
family. In some places it is so at this day; nor will money at present 
purchase a greater quantity of commodities there than in other 
places. In a country where the surplus produce of a large estate 
must be consumed upon the estate itself, it will frequently be more 
convenient for the proprietor, that part of it be consumed at a dis- 
tance from his own house, provided they who consume it are as de- 
pendent upon him as either his retainers or his menial servants. He 
is thereby saved from the embarrassment of either too large a com- 
pany or too large a family. A tenant at will, who possesses land suf- 
ficient to maintain his family for little more than a quit-rent, is as 
dependent upon the proprietor as any servant or retainer whatever, 
and must obey him with as little reserve. Such a proprietor, as he 
feeds his servants and retainers at his own house, so he feeds his ten- 
ants at their houses. The subsistence of both is derived from his 
bounty, and its continuance depends upon his good pleasure. 

Upon the authority which the great proprietors necessarily had in 
such a state of things over their tenants and retainers, was founded 
the power of the ancient barons. They necessarily became the 

* “No less than 30,000 persons are said to have daily lived at his board in 
the different manors and castles which he possessed in England.”— Hume, 
History, ed. of 1773, vol iii., p. 182. In Lectures, p. 42, it had been “40,000 
people, besides tenants.” 

® “An Arab prince will often dine in the street, before his door, and call to 
all that pass, even beggars, in the usual expression, Bismillah, that is, In the 
name of God; who come and sit down, and when they have done, give their 
Hamdellilah, that is, God be praised. For the Arabs are great levellers, put 
everybody on a footing with them; and it is by such generosity and hospital- 
ity that they maintain their interest.”— Richard Pococke, Description of the 
East, 1743, vol. i., p. 183. 



TOWNS IMPROVED THE COUNTRY 387 

judges in peace, and the leaders in war, of all who dwelt upon their 
estates. They could maintain order and execute the law 'within their 
respective demesnes, because each of them could there turn the 
whole force of all the inhabitants against the injustice of any one. 
No other person had sufficient authority to do this. The king in par- 
ticular had not. In those ancient times he was little more than the 
greatest proprietor in his dominions, to whom, for the sake of com- 
mon defence against their common enemies, the other great pro- 
prietors paid certain respects. To have enforced payment of a small 
debt within the lands of a great proprietor, where ail the inhabitants 
were armed and accustomed to stand by one another, would have 
cost the king, had he attempted it by his own authority, almost the 
same effort as to extinguish a civil war. He was, therefore, obliged 
to abandon the administration of justice through the greater part of 
the country, to those who were capable of administering it; and for 
the same reason to leave the command of the country militia t‘o 
those whom that militia would obey. 

It is a mistake to imagine that those territorial jurisdictions took 
their origin from the feudal law. Not only the highest jurisdictions 
both civil and criminal, but the power of levying troops, of coining 
money, and even that of making bye-laws for the government of 
their o-wn people, were all rights possessed allodially by the great 
proprietors'of land several centuries before even the name of the 
feudal law was kno'wn in Europe. The authority and jurisdiction of 
the Saxon lords in England, appear ^ to have been as great before 
the conquest, as that of any of the Norman lords after it. But the 
feudal law is not supposed to have become the common law of Eng- 
land till after the conquest.'^ That the most extensive authority and 
jurisdictions were possessed by the great lords in France allodially, 
long before the feudal law was introduced into that country, is a 
matter of fact that admits of no doubt. That authority and those 
jurisdictions all necessarily flowed from the state of property and 
manners just now described. Without remounting to the remote an- 
tiquities of either the French or English monarchies, we may find in 
much later times many proofs that such effects must always flow 
from such causes. It is not thirty years ago since Mr. Cameron of 
Lochiel, a gentleman of Lochabar in Scotland, without any legal 
warrant whatever, not being what was then called a lord of regality, 
nor even a tenant in chief, but a vassal of the duke of Argyle, and 
without being so much as a justice of peace, used, notwithstanding, 
to exercise the highest criminal jurisdiction over his own people. He 


was 

founded 
on thi^ 


It was an- 
terior to 
and inde- 
pendent 
of the 
feudal 
law. 


®Eds. I and 2 read “appears.’ 


"^Hume, History, ed. of i773j U 224 * 



It was 
moderat- 
ed by the 
feudal 
law, 


and un- 
dermined 
by foreign 
com- 
merce. 


3S8 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

is said to have done so with great equity, though without any of the 
formalities of justice; and it is not improbable that the state of that 
part of the country at that time made it necessary for him to assume 
this authority in order to maintain the public peace. That gentle- 
man, whose rent never exceeded five hundred pounds a year, car- 
ried, in 1745, eight hundred of his own people into the rebellion 
with him.® 

The introduction of the feudal law, so far from extending, may 
be regarded as an attempt to moderate the authority of the great 
allodial lords.® It established a regular subordination, accompanied 
with a long train of services and duties, from the king down to the 
smallest proprietor. During the minority of the proprietor, the rent, 
together with the management of his lands, fell into the hands of 
his immediate superior, and, consequently, those of all great pro- 
prietors into the hands of the king, who was charged with the main- 
tenance and education of the pupil, and who, from his authority as 
guardian, was supposed to have a right of disposing of him in mar- 
riage, provided it was in a manner not unsuitable to his rank. But 
though this institution necessarily tended to strengthen the auth- 
ority of the king, and to weaken that of the great proprietors, it 
could not do either sufficiently for establishing order and good gov- 
ernment among the inhabitants of the country; because it could not 
alter sufficiently that state of property and manners from which the 
disorders arose. The authority of government still continued to be, 
as before, too weak in the head and too strong in the inferior mem- 
bers, and the excessive strength of the inferior members was the 
cause of the weakness of the head. After the institution of feudal 
subordination, the king was as incapable of restraining the violence 
of the great lords as before. They still continued to make war ac- 
cording to their own discretion, almost continually upon one an- 
other, and very frequently upon the king; and the open country 
still continued to be a scene of violence, rapine, and disorder. 

But what all the violence of the feudal institutions could never 
have effected, the silent and insensible operation of foreign com- 
merce and manufactures gradually brought about. These gradually 
furnished the great proprietors with something for which they could 
exchange the whole surplus produce of their lands, and which they 
could consume themselves without sharing it either with tenants or 
retainers. All for ourselves, and nothing for other people, seems, in 

® “The Highlands of Scotland have long been entitled by law to every priv- 
ilege of British subjects; but it was not till very lately that the common 
people could in fact enjoy those privileges.”— Hume, History, vol. i., p. 214, 
ed. of 1773. Cp. Lectures, p. 116. 

• Lectures, pp. 38, 39. 



TOWNS IMPROVED THE COUNTRY 3^9 

every age of the world, to have been the vile maxim of the masters 
of mankind. As soon, therefore, as they could find a method of con- 
suming the whole value of their rents themselves, they had no dis- 
position to share them with any other persons. For a pair of dia- 
mond buckles perhaps, or for something as frivolous and useless, 
they exchanged the maintenance, or what is the same thing, the 
price of the maintenance of a thousand men for a year, and with it 
the whole weight and authority which it could give them. The 
buckles, however, were to be all their own, and no other human 
creature was to have any share of them; whereas in the more an- 
cient method of expence they must have shared with at least a thou- 
sand people. With the judges that were to determine the preference, 
this difference was perfectly decisive; and thus, for the gratifica- 
tion of the most childish, the meanest and the most sordid of all 
vanities, they gradually bartered their whole power and authority.^® 

In a country where there is no foreign commerce, nor any of the 
finer manufactures, a man of ten thousand a year cannot well em- 
ploy his revenue in any other way than in maintaining, perhaps, a 
thousand families, who are all of them necessarily at his command. 
In the present state of Europe, a man of ten thousand a year can 
spend his whole revenue, and he generally does so, without directly 
maintaining twenty people, or being able to command more than 
ten footmen not worth the commanding. Indirectly, perhaps, he 
maintains as great or even a greater number of people than he could 
have done by the ancient method of expence. For though the quan- 
tity of precious productions for which he exchanges his whole rev- 
enue be very small, the number of workmen employed in collecting 
and preparing it, must necessarily have been very great. Its great 
price generally arises from the wages of their labour, and the profits 
of all their immediate employers. By paying that price he indirectly 
pays all those wages and profits, and thus indirectly contributes to 
the maintenance of all the workmen and their employers. He gen- 
erally contributes, however, but a very small proportion to that of 
each, to very few perhaps a tenth, to many not a hundredth, and to 
some not a thousandth, nor even a ten thousandth part of their 
whole annual maintenance. Though he contributes, therefore, to the 
maintenance of them all, they are all more or less independent of 
him, because generally they can all be maintained without him. 

When the great proprietors of land spend their rents in maintain- 
ing their tenants and retainers, each of them maintains entirely all 
his own tenants and all his own retainers. But when they spend 
them in maintaining tradesmen and artificers, they may, all of them 

“Hume, History j ed. of 1773, vol. iii, p. 400; vol. v., p. 488. 


At present 
a rich 
man 

maintains 
in alias 
many per- 
sons as an 
ancient 
baron, but 
he con- 
tributes 
only a 
small por- 
tion of the 
main- 
tenance 
of each 
person. 



To meet 
cheir new 
expenses 
the great 
proprie- 
tors dis- 
missed 
their re- 
tainers 
and their 
unneces- 
sary 
tenants, 
and gave 
the re- 
maining 
tenants 
long 
leases, 


thus mak- 
ing them 
inde- 
pendent. 


The ^eat 
proprie- 
tors thus 
became 


390 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

taken together, perhaps, maintain as great, or, on account of the 
waste which attends rustic hospitality, a greater number of people 
than before. Each of them, however, taken singly, contributes often 
but a very small share to the maintenance of any individual of this 
greater number. Each tradesman or artificer derives his subsistence 
from the employment, not of one, but of a hundred or a thousand 
different customers. Though in some measure obliged to them all, 
therefore, he is not absolutely dependent upon any one of them. 

The personal expence of the great proprietors having in this man- 
ner gradually increased, it was impossible that the number of their 
retainers should not as gradually diminish, till they were at last dis- 
missed altogether. The same cause gradually led them to dismiss 
the unnecessary part of their tenants. Farms were enlarged, and the 
occupiers of land, notwithstanding the complaints of depopulation, 
reduced to the number necessary for cultivating it, according to the 
imperfect state of cultivation and improvement in those times. By 
the removal of the unnecessary mouths, and by exacting from the 
farmer the full value of the farm, a greater surplus, or what is the 
same thing, the price of a greater surplus, was obtained for the pro- 
prietor, which the merchants and manufacturers soon furnished 
him with a method of spending upon his own person in the same 
manner as he had done the rest. The same cause continuing to op- 
erate, he was desirous to raise his rents above what his lands, in the 
actual state of their improvement, could afford. His tenants could 
agree to this upon one condition only, that they should be secured in 
their possession, for such a term of years as might give them time to 
recover with profit whatever they should lay out in the further im- 
provement of the land. The expensive vanity of the landlord made 
him willing to accept of this condition; and hence the origin of long 
leases. 

Even a tenant at will, who pays the full value of the land, is not 
altogether dependent upon the landlord. The pecuniary advantages 
whidi they receive from one another, are mutual and equal, and 
such a tenant will expose neither his life nor his fortune in the ser- 
vice of the proprietor. But if he has a lease for a long term of years, 
he is altogether independent; and his landlord must not expect from 
him even the most trifling service beyond what is either expressly 
stipulated in the lease, or imposed upon him by the common and 
known law of the country. 

The tenants having in this manner become independent, and the 
retainers being dismissed, the great proprietors were no longer cap- 
able of interrupting the regular execution of justice, or of disturbing 
the peace of the country. Having sold their birth-right, not like 



TOWNS IMPROVED THE COUNTRY 39 i 

Esau for a mess of pottage in time of hunger and necessity, but in 
the wantonness of plenty, for trinkets and baubles, fitter to be the 
play-things of children than the serious pursuits of men, they be- 
came as insignificant as any substantial burgher or tradesman in a 
city. A regular government was established in the country as well as 
in the city, nobody having sufficient power to disturb its operations 
in the one, any more than in the other. 

It does not, perhaps, relate to the present subject, but I cannot 
help remarking it, that very old families, such as have possessed 
some considerable estate from father to son for many successive 
generations, are very rare in commercial countries. In countries 
which have little commerce, on the contrary, such as Wales or the 
highlands of Scotland, they are very common. The Arabian his- 
tories seem to be all full of genealogies, and there is a history writ- 
ten by a Tartar Khan, which has been translated into several Euro- 
pean languages, and which contains scarce any thing else; a proof 
that ancient families are very common among those nations. In 
countries where a rich man can spend his revenue in no other way 
than by maintaining as many people as it can maintain, he is not 
apt to run out, and his benevolence it seems is seldom so violent as 
to attempt to maintain more than he can afford. But where he can 
spend the greatest revenue upon his own person, he frequently has 
no bounds to his expence, because he frequently has no bounds to 
his vanity, or to his affection for his own person. In commercial 
countries, therefore, riches, in spite of the most violent regulations 
of law to prevent their dissipation, very seldom remain long in the 
same family. Among simple nations, on the contrary, they frequent- 
ly do* without any regulations of law: for among nations of shep- 
herds, such as the Tartars and Arabs, the consumable nature of 
their property necessarily renders all such regulations impossible. 

A revolution of the greatest importance to tiie public happiness, 
was in this manner brought about by two different orders of people, 
who had not the least intention to serve the public. To gratify the 
most childish vanity was the sole motive of the great proprietors. 
The merchants and artificers, much less ridiculous, acted merely 
from a view to their own interest, and in pursuit of their own pedlar 
principle of turning a penny wherever a penny was to be got. 
Neither of them had either knowledge or foresight of that great 

^Histoire genealogique des Tatars traduite du manuscript Tartar e D^Abul- 
gasi-Bayadur-‘Chan et enrichie d^un grand nombre de remarques authentiques 
et trh curieuses sur le viritable estat present de VAsie septentrionale avec les 
cartes geographiques necessaires, par D., Leyden, 1726. *^6 preface says some 
Swedish officers imprisoned in Siberia had it translated into Russian and then 
retranslated it themselves into various other languages. 


insignifi- 

cant. 


Old fami- 
lies are 
rare in 
commer- 
cial coun- 
tries. 


A revolu- 
tion was 
thus in- 
sensibly 
brought 
about, 



392 


and com- 
merce and 
manufac- 
tures be- 
came the 
cause of 
the im- 
prove- 
ment of 
the coun- 
try. 

This 
order of 
things is 
both slow 
and un- 
certain 
compared 
with the 
natural 
order, as 
maybe 
shown by 
the rapid 
progress 
of the 
North 
American 
colonies, 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

revolution which the folly of the one, and the industry of the other, 
was gradually bringing about. 

It is thus that through the greater part of Europe the commerce 
and manufactures of cities, instead of being the effect, have been 
the cause and occasion of the improvement and cultivation of the 
country. 

This order, however, being contrary to the natural course of 
things, is necessarily both slow and uncertain. Compare the slow 
progress of those European countries of which the wealth depends 
very much upon their commerce and manufactures, with the rapid 
advances of our North American colonies, of which the wealth is 
founded altogether in agriculture. Through the greater part of Eur- 
ope, the number of inhabitants is not supposed to double in less 
than five hundred years. In several of our North American colonies, 
it is found to double in twenty or five-and-twenty years.^^ In Eur- 
ope the law of primogeniture, and perpetuities of different kinds, 
prevent the division of great estates, and thereby hinder the mul- 
tiplication of small proprietors. A small proprietor, however, who 
knows every part of his little territory, who views it all with 
the affection which property, especially small property, naturally 
inspires, and who upon that account takes pleasure not only in cul- 
tivating but in adorning it, is generally of all improvers the most in- 
dustrious, the most intelligent, and the most successful.^^ The same 
regulations, besides, keep so much land out of the market, that 
there are always more capitals to buy than there is land to sell, so 
that what is sold always sells at a monopoly price. The rent never 
pays the interest of the purchase-money, and is besides burdened 
with repairs and other occasional charges, to which the interest of 
money is not liable. To purchase land is every-where in Europe a 
most unprofitable employment of a small capital. For the sake of 
the superior security, indeed, a man of moderate circumstances, 
when he retires from business, will sometimes chuse to lay out his 
little capital in land. A man of profession too, whose revenue is de- 
rived from another source, often loves to secure his savings in the 
same way. But a young man, who, instead of applying to trade or to 
some profession, should employ a capital of two or three thousand 
pounds in the purchase and cultivation of a small piece of land, 
might indeed expect to live very happily, and very independently, 
but must bid adieu, forever, to all hope of either great fortune or 
great illustration, which by a different employment of his stock he 
might have had the same chance of acquiring with other people. 

“ Above, p 70, note. “ Ed 5 omits “who” by a misprint 

^^Eds 2-5 read “with all,” doubtless a corruption. “Cp. above, p 364. 



TOWNS IMPROVED THE COUNTRY 393 

Such a person too, though he cannot aspire at being proprietor, will 
often disdain to be a farmer. The small quantity of land, therefore, 
which is brought to market, and the high price of what is brought 
thither,^® prevents a great number of capitals from being employed 
in its cultivation and improvement which would otherwise have 
taken that direction. In North America, on the contrary, fifty or 
sixty pounds is often found a sufficient stock to begin a plantation 
with. The purchase and improvement of uncultivated land, is there 
the most profitable employment of the smallest as well as of the 
greatest capitals, and the most direct road to all the fortune and 
illustration which can be acquired in that country. Such land, in- 
deed, is in North America to be had almost for nothing, or at a price 
much below the value of the natural produce; a thing impossible in 
Europe, or, indeed, in any country where all lands have long been 
private property. If landed estates, however, were divided equally 
among all the children, upon the death of any proprietor who left 
a numerous family, the estate would generally be sold. So much 
land would come to market, that it could no longer sell at a monop- 
oly price. The free rent of the land would go nearer to pay the in- 
terest of the purchase-money, and a small capital might be em- 
ployed in purchasing land as profitably as in any other way. 

England, on account of the natural fertility of the soil, of the great 
extent of the sea-coast in proportion to that of the whole coun- 
try, and of the many navigable rivers which run through it, and af- 
ford the conveniency of water carriage to some of the most inland 
parts of it, is perhaps as well fitted by nature as any large country 
in Europe, to be the seat of foreign commerce, and manufactures 
for distant sale, and of all the improvements which these can oc- 
casion. From the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth too, the Eng- 
lish legislature has been peculiarly attentive to the interests of 
commerce and manufactures, and in reality there is no country in 
Europe, Holland itself not excepted, of which the law is, upon the 
whole, more favourable to this sort of industry. Commerce and 
manufactures Save accordingly been continually advancing during 
all this period. The cultivation and improvement of the country has, 
no doubt, been gradually advancing too: But it seems to have fol- 
lowed slowly, and at a distance, the more rapid progress of com- 
merce and manufactures. The greater part of the country must 
probably have been cultivated before the reign of Elizabeth; and a 
very great part of it still remains uncultivated, and the cultivation 
of the far greater part, much inferior to what it might be. The law 
of England, however, favours agriculture not only indirectly by the 

Ed. I does not contain “the.” 


and the 
slow 
progress 
of Eng- 
land in 
agricul- 
ture in 
spite of 
favours 
accorded 
to it 


“ Ed. I does not contain “thither.’ 



and the 
still slow- 
er pro- 
gress of 
France, 


394 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

protection of commerce, but by several direct encouragements. Ex- 
cept in times of scarcity, the exportation of corn is not only free, but 
encouraged by a bounty. In times of moderate plenty, the importa- 
tion of foreign corn is loaded with duties that amount to a prohibi- 
tion. The importation of live cattle, except from Ireland, is pro- 
hibited at all times,^® and it is but of late that it was permitted from 
thence.^^ Those who cultivate the land, therefore, have a monopoly 
against their countrymen for the two greatest and most important 
articles of land produce, bread and butcher’s meat. These encour- 
agements, though at bottom, perhaps, as I shall endeavour to show 
hereafter,^® altogether illusory, sufficiently demonstrate at least the 
good intention of the legislature to favour agriculture. But what is 
of much more importance than all of them, the yeomanry of Eng- 
land are rendered as secure, as independent, and as respectable as 
law can make them. No country, therefore, in which the right of 
primogeniture takes place, which pays tithes, and where perpet- 
uities, though contrary to the spirit of the law, are admitted in 
some cases, can give more encouragement to agriculture than Eng- 
land. Such, however, notwithstanding, is the state of its cultivation. 
What would it have been, had the law given no direct encourage- 
ment to agriculture besides what arises indirectly from the progress 
of commerce, and had left the yeomanry in the same condition as in 
most other countries of Europe? It is now more than two hundred 
years since the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth, a period as long 
as the course of human prosperity usually endures. 

France seems to have had a considerable share of foreign com- 
merce near a century before England was distinguished as a com- 
mercial country. The marine of France was considerable, according 
to the notions of the times, before the expedition of Charles the 
Vlllth to Naples.^^ The cultivation and improvement of France, 

“i8 Car.IL, c. 2. 

“32 Geo. n., c. II, § i; 5 Geo. III., c. 10, 12 Geo. III., c, 2. 

^ Below, pp. 426-429, 490-510. 

^ It seems likely that Charles VIII. is here (though not on the next page) 
confused with Charles of Anjou, brother of St. Louis. At any rate Henault 
(who is quoted below, p. 588) says “Notre marine aussitot d6truite que creee 
sous Philippe Auguste, s’etait bien retablie sous S. Louis si, comme le dit un 
historien, ce prince embarqua soixante-mille hommes a Aigues-mortes . . , 
quant a la premiere expedition, Joinville dit qu’au depart de Chypre pour la 
conquete de Damiette, il y avait dix-huit cents vaisseaux tant grands que 
petits. S. Louis avait aussi mis en mer une flotte considerable pour defendre 
les cotes de Poitou contre la flotte de Henri III., et son frere Charles d’ Anjou 
en avait une de quatre-vingts voiles, composee de galores et de vaisseaux, lors 
de son expedition de Naples ” — Nouvel Abrege chronologique de Vhistoire de 
France^ 1768, tom. i., p. 201, ad. 1299. This puts the French marine 200 years 
earlier. 



TOWNS IMPROVED THE COUNTRY 395 

however, is, upon the whole, inferior to that of England. The law of 
the country has never given the same direct encouragement to 
agriculture. 

The foreign commerce of Spain and Portugal to the other parts Spain and 
of Europe, though chiefly carried on in foreign ships, is very consid- Portugal, 
erable. That to their colonies is carried on in their own, and is much 
greater, on account of the great riches and extent of those colonies. 

But it has never introduced any considerable manufactures for dis- 
tant sale into either of those countries, and the greater part of both 
still remains uncultivated. The foreign commerce of Portugal is of 
older standing than that of any great country in Europe, except 
Italy, 

Italy is the only great country of Europe which seems to have Italy 
been cultivated and improved in every part, by means of foreign 
commerce and manufactures for distant sale. Before the invasion of throu^^^- 
Charles the Vlllth, Italy, according to Guicciardin,-^ was culti- out by 
vated not less in the most mountainous and barren parts of the commerce 
country, than in the plainest and most fertile. The advantageous and ex- 

situation of the country, and the great number of independent 
states which at that time subsisted in it, probably contributed not a 
little to this general cultivation. It is not impossible too, notwith- 
standing this general expression of one of the most judicious and re- 
served of modern historians, that Italy was not at that time better 
cultivated than England is at present. 

The capital, however, that is acquired to any country by com- The na- 
merce and manufactures, is all a very precarious and uncertain 
possession, till some part of it has been secured and realised in the quired by 
cultivation and improvement of its lands. A merchant, it has been commerce 
said very properly, is not necessarily the citizen of any particular 
country. It is in a great measure indifferent to him from what place tures is an 

he carries on his trade ; and a very trifling disgust will make him re- uncert^ 
move his capital, and together with it all the industry which it sup- 
ports, from one country to another. No part of it can be said to be- isedinthe 
long to any particular country, till it has been spread as it were over “ 

the face of that country, either in buildings, or in the lasting im- i^nd. 
provement of lands. No vestige now remains of the great wealth, 
said to have been possessed by the greater part of the Hans towns, 
except in the obscure histories of the thirteenth and fourteenth cen- 
turies. It is even uncertain where some of them were situated, or to 

“ “Perchfe ridotta tutta in somma pace e tranquillita, coltivata non meno 
ne’ luoghi pin montuosi, e piu steriH, che nelle pianure, e regioni sue piu 
fertili, ne sottoposta ad altro Imperio, che de^ suoi medesimi, non solo era ab- 
bondantissima d’ abitatori, e di richezze.” — Guicciardini, Della htoria 
Italia, Venice, 1738, vol. i., p. 2. 



396 the wealth of NATIONS 

what towns in Europe the Latin names given to some of them be- 
long. But though the misfortunes of Italy in the end of the fifteenth 
and beginning of the sixteenth centuries greatly diminished the 
commerce and manufactures of the cities of Lombardy and Tus- 
cany, those countries still continue to be among the most populous 
and best cultivated in Europe. The civil wars of Flanders, and the 
Spanish government which succeeded them, chased away the great 
commerce of Antwerp, Ghent, and Bruges. But Flanders still con- 
tinues to be one of the richest, best cultivated, and most populous 
provinces of Europe. The ordinary revolutions of war and govern- 
ment easily dry up the sources of that wealth which arises from 
commerce only. That which arises from the more solid improve- 
ments of agriculture, is much more durable, and cannot be de- 
stroyed but by those more violent convulsions occasioned by the 
depredations of hostile and barbarous nations continued for a cen- 
tury or two together; such as those that happened for some time 
before and after the fall of the Roman empire in the western prov- 
inces of Europe. 



BOOK IV 


Of Systems of political (Economy 
INTRODUCTION 

Political oeconomy, considered as a branch of the science of a 
statesman or legislator, proposes two distinct objects: first, to pro- 
vide a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people, or more prop- 
erly to enable them to provide such a revenue or subsistence for 
themselves ; and secondly, to supply the state or commonwealth with 
a revenue sufficient for the public services. It proposes to enrich 
both the people and the sovereign.^ 

The different progress of opulence in different ages and nations, 
has given occasion to two different systems of political oeconomy, 
with regard to enriching the people. The one may be called the sys- 
tem of commerce, the other that of agriculture. I shall endeavour 
to explain both as fully and distinctly as I can, and shall begin with 
the system of commerce. It is the modern system, and is best under- 
stood in our own country and in our own times. 

^ For other definitions of the purpose or nature of poKtical oeconomy see the 
index, s,v. 


The first 
object of 
political 
(Economy 
is to pro- 
vide sub- 
sistence 
for the 
people. 

Two dif- 
ferent 
systems 
proposed 
for this 
end will 
be ex- 
plained. 


397 



CHAPTER I 


Wealth 

and 

money in 
common 
language 
are con- 
sidered 
synony- 
mous. 


Similarly 
the Tar- 
tars 

thought 
wealth 
consisted 
of cattle. 


OF THE PRESrCIPLE OF THE COMMERCIAL OR MERCANTILE SYSTEM 

That wealth consists in money, or in gold and silver, is a popular 
notion which naturally arises from the double function of money, 
as the instrument of commerce, and as the measure of value. In 
consequence of its being the instrument of commerce, when we have 
money we can more readily obtain whatever else we have occasion 
for, than by means of any other commodity. The great affair, we 
always find, is to get money. When that is obtained, there is no dif- 
ficulty in making any subsequent purchase. In consequence of its 
being the measure of value, we estimate that of all other commod- 
ities by the quantity of money which they will exchange for. We say 
of a rich man that he is worth a great deal, and of a poor man that 
he is worth very little money. A frugal man, or a man eager to be 
rich, is said to love money; and a careless, a generous, or a profuse 
man, is said to be indifferent about it. To grow rich is to get money ; 
and wealth and money, in short, are, in common language, consid- 
ered as in every respect S3monymous. 

A rich country, in the same manner as a rich man, is supposed to 
be a country abounding in money; and to heap up gold and silver 
in any country is supposed to be the readiest way to enrich it. For 
some time after the discovery of America, the first enquiry of the 
Spaniards, when they arrived upon any unknown coast, used to be, 
if there was any gold or silver to be found in the neighbourhood? 
By the information which they received, they judged whether it was 
worth while to make a settlement there, or if the country was worth 
the conquering. Plano Carpino, a monk sent ambassador from the 
king of France to one of the sons of the famous Gengis Khan, says 
that the Tartars used frequently to ask him, if there was plenty of 
sheep and oxen in the kingdom of France?^ Their enquiry had the 

^ There seems to be a confusion between Plano-Carpini, a Franciscan sent 
as legate by Pope Innocent IV. in 1246, and Guillaume de Rubruquis, another 
Frandscan sent as ambassador by Louis IX. in 1253. As is pointed out by 
Rogers in a note on this passap, the reference appears to be to Rubruquis, 
Voyage en Tartarie et d la Chine, chap, xxxiii. The great Khan’s secretaries, 

398 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 399 

same object with that of the Spaniards. They wanted to know if the 
country was rich enough to be worth the conquering. Among the 
Tartars, as among all other nations of shepherds, who are generally 
ignorant of the use of money, cattle are the instruments of com- 
merce and the measures of value. Wealth, therefore, according to 
them, consisted in cattle, as according to the Spaniards it consisted 
in gold and silver. Of the two, the Tartar notion, perhaps, was the 
nearest to the truth. 

Mr. Locke remarks a distinction between money and other move- 
able goods. All other moveable goods, he says, are of so consumable 
a nature that the wealth which consists in them cannot be much de- 
pended on, and a nation which abounds in them one year may, 
without any exportation, but merely by their own waste and ex- 
travagance, be in great want of them the next. Money, on the con- 
trary, is a steady friend, which, though it may travel about from 
hand to hand, yet if it can be kept from going out of the country, is 
not very liable to be wasted and consumed. Gold and silver, there- 
fore, are, according to him, the most solid and substantial part of 
the moveable wealth of a nation, and to multiply those metals 
ought, he thinks, upon that account, to be the great object of its 
political ceconomy.^ 

Others admit that if a nation could be separated from all the 
world, it would be of no consequence how much, or how little money 
circulated in it. The consumable goods which were circulated by 
means of this money, would only be exchanged for a greater or a 
smaller number of pieces; but the real wealth or poverty of the 
country, they allow, would depend altogether upon the abundance 
or scarcity of those consumable goods. But it is otherwise, they 
think, with countries which have connections with foreign nations, 
and which are obliged to carry on foreign wars, and to maintain 
fleets and armies in distant countries. This, they say, cannot be 
done, but by sending abroad money to pay them with; and a nation 
cannot send much money abroad, unless it has a good deal at home. 
Every such nation, therefore, must endeavour in time of peace to 
accumulate gold and silver, that, when occasion requires, it may 
have wherewithal to carry on foreign wars. 

Rubruquis states, on one occasion displayed curiosity about France: “s’en- 
querant s’il y avait force boeufs, moutons, et chevaux, comme s’ils eussent 
deja et6 tons prets d’y venir et emmener tout.” Plano-Carpini and Rubruquis 
are both in Bergeron’s Voyages faits principalement en Asie dans Us m, mi.t 
xiv. et XV. sikUs, La Haye, 1735. 

There is very little foundation for any part of this paragraph. It perhaps 
originated in an inaccurate recollection of pp. 17, 18 and 77-79 of Some Con- 
siderations (1696 ed.), and §§ 46-50 of CivU Government. It was probably 
transferred bodily from the Lectures without verification. See Lectures, p. 198. 


Locke 
thought 
gold and 
silver the 
most sub- 
stantial 
part of 
the 

wealth of 
a nation. 


Others 
say that 
it is neces- 
sary to 
have 
much 
money in 
order to 
maintain 
fleets and 
armies 
abroad. 



So all 
European 
nations 
have tried 
to accu- 
mulate 
gold and 
silver. 

At first 
by a pro- 
hibition 
of expor- 
tation, 


but mer- 
chants 
found this 
incon- 
venient, 


and 

therefore 
argued 
that ex- 
portation 
did not 
always 
diminish 
the stock 
in the 
country, 


and that 
the metals 
could be 


400 the wealth of nations 

In consequence of these popular notions, all the different nations 
of Europe have studied, though to little purpose, every possible 
means of accumulating gold and silver in their respective countries. 
Spain and Portugal, the proprietors of the principal mines which 
supply Europe with those metals, have either prohibited their ex- 
portation under the severest penalties, or subjected it to a consid- 
erable duty.^ The like prohibition seems anciently to have made a 
part of the policy of most other European nations. It is even to be 
found, where we should least of all expect to find it, in some old 
Scotch acts of parliament, which forbid under heavy penalties the 
carrying gold or silver jorth of the kingdom? The like policy an- 
ciently took place both in France and England. 

When those countries became commercial, the merchants found 
this prohibition, upon many occasions, extremely inconvenient. 
They could frequently buy more advantageously with gold and sil- 
ver than with any other commodity, the foreign goods which they 
wanted, either to import into their own, or to carry to some other 
foreign country. They remonstrated, therefore, against this prohi- 
bition as hurtful to trade. 

They represented, first, that the exportation of gold and silver in 
order to purchase foreign goods, did not always diminish the quan- 
tity of those metals in the kingdom. That, on the contrary, it might 
frequently increase that quantity; ® because, if the consumption of 
foreign goods was not thereby increased in the country, those goods 
might be re-exported to foreign countries, and, being there sold for 
a large profit, might bring back much more treasure than was orig- 
inally sent out to purchase them. Mr. Mun compares this operation 
of foreign trade to the seed-time and harvest of agriculture. ^Tf we 
only behold,” says he, “the actions of the husbandman in the seed- 
time, when he casteth away much good corn into the ground, we 
shall account him rather a madman than a husbandman. But when 
we consider his labours in the harvest, which is the end of his en- 
deavours, we shall find the worth and plentiful increase of his 
actions.” ^ 

They represented, secondly, that this prohibition could not hin- 
der the exportation of gold and silver, which, on account of the 

® See below, p. 478, note. ^ Ed i reads “expect least of all.’^ 

®The words “forth of the realm” occur in (January) 1487, c. ii. Other acts 
are 1436, c. 13 ; 14S1, c 15; 1482, c 8. 

Ed. I reads “increase it.” 

England's Treasure by Forraign Trade, or the BaUance of our Forraign 
Trade is the Rule of our Treasure, 1664, chap, iv., ad fin,, which reads, how- 
ever, “we will rather accompt him a mad man ” 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 40 i 

smallness of their bulk in proportion to their value, could easily be 
smuggled abroad.^ That this exportation could only be prevented 
by a proper attention to, what they called, the balance of trade.® 
That when the country exported to a greater value than it imported, 
a balance became due to it from foreign nations, which was neces- 
sarily paid to it in gold and silver, and thereby increased the quan- 
tity of those metals in the kingdom. But that when it imported to a 
greater value than it exported, a contrary balance became due to 
foreign nations, which was necessarily paid to them in the same 
manner, and thereby diminished that quantity. That in this case to 
prohibit the exportation of those metis could not prevent it, but 
only by making it more dangerous, render it more expensive. That 
the exchange was thereby turned more against the country which 
owed the balance, than it otherwise might have been; the merchant 
who purchased a bill upon the foreign country being obliged to pay 
the banker who sold it, not only for the natural risk, trouble and ex- 
pence of sending the money tMther, but for the extraordinary risk 
arising from the prohibition. But that the more the exchange was 
against any country, the more the balance of trade became neces- 
sarily against it; the money of that country becoming necessarily of 
so much less value, in comparison with that of the country to which 
the balance was due. That if the exchange between England and 
Holland, for example, was five per cent, against England, it would 
require a hundred and five ounces of silver in England to purchase 
a bill for a hundred ounces of silver in Holland: that a hundred and 
five ounces of silver in England, therefore, would be worth only a 
hundred ounces of silver in Holland, and would purchase only a 
proportionable quantity of Dutch goods: but that a hundred ounces 
of silver in Holland, on the contrary, would be worth a hundred and 
five ounces in England, and would purchase a proportionable quan- 
tity of English goods: that the English goods which were sold to 
Holland would be sold so much cheaper; and the Dutch goods 
which were sold to England, so much dearer, by the difference of 
the exchange; that the one would draw so much less Dutch money 
to England, and the other so much more English money to Holland, 
as this difference amounted to: and that the balance of trade, there- 

® Mun, England* s Treasure, chap. vi. 

^ “Among other things relating to trade there hath been much discourse of 
the balance of trade; the right understanding whereof may be of singular 
use.”~Josiah Child, New Discourse of Trade, 1694, p. 152, chap, ix., introduc- 
ing an explanation. The term was used before Mun’s work was written. See 
Palgrave’s Dictionary of Political Economy, Balance of Trade, History of 
the theory 


retained 
only by 
attention 
to the 
balance of 
trade. 



Thdir 
argu- 
ments 
were 
partly so- 
phistical^ 


but they 
convinced 
parlia- 
ments and 
councils. 


402 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

fore, would necessarily be so much more against England, and 
would require a greater balance of gold and silver to be exported to 
Holland. 

Those arguments were partly solid and partly sophistical. They 
were solid so far as they asserted that the exportation of gold and 
silver in trade might frequently be advantageous to the country. 
They were solid too, in asserting that no prohibition could prevent 
their exportation, when private people found any advantage in ex- 
porting them. But they were sophistical in supposing, that either to 
preserve or to augment the quantity of those metals required more 
the attention of government, than to preserve or to augment the 
quantity of any other useful commodities, which the freedom of 
trade, without any such attention, never fails to supply in the prop- 
er quantity. They were sophistical too, perhaps, in asserting that 
the high price of exchange necessarily increased, what they called, 
the unfavourable balance of trade, or occasioned the exportation of 
a greater quantity of gold and silver. That high price, indeed, was 
extremely disadvantageous to the merchants who had any money 
to pay in foreign countries. They paid so much dearer for the bills 
which their bankers granted them upon those countries. But though 
the risk arising from the prohibition might occasion some extraor- 
dinary expence to the bankers, it would not necessarily carry any 
more money out of the country. This expence would generally be 
all laid out in the country, in smuggling the money out of it, and 
could seldom occasion the exportation of a single six-pence beyond 
the precise sum drawn for. The high price of exchange too would 
naturally dispose the merchants to endeavour to make their exports 
nearly balance their imports, in order that they might have this 
high exchange to pay upon as small a sum as possible. The high 
price of exchange, besides, must necessarily have operated as a tax, 
in raising the price of foreign goods, and thereby diminishing their 
consumption.^® It would tend, therefore, not to increase, but to 
diminish, what they called, the unfavourable balance of trade, and 
consequently the exportation of gold and silver. 

Such as they were, however, those arguments convinced the peo- 
ple to whom they were addressed. They were addressed by mer- 
chants to parliaments, and to the councils of princes, to nobles, and 
to country gentlemen; by those who were supposed to understand 
trade, to those who were conscious to themselves that they knew 
nothing about the matter. That foreign trade enriched the country, 
experience demonstrated to the nobles and country gentlemen, as 

sentence appears first in ed. 2. Ed. i begins the next sentence, “The 
high price of exchange therefore would tend ” 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^3 

well as to the merchants; but how, or in what manner, none of them 
well knew. The merchants knew perfectly in what manner it en- 
riched themselves. It was their business to know it. But to know in 
what manner it enriched the country, w^as no part of their business. 
This subject never came into their consideration, but when they had 
occasion to apply to their country for some change in the laws re- 
lating to foreign trade. It then became necessary to say something 
about the beneficial effects of foreign trade, and the manner in 
which those effects were obstructed by the laws as they then stood. 
To the judges who were to decide the business, it appeared a most 
satisfactory account of the matter, when they were told that foreign 
trade brought money into the country, but that the laws in question 
hindered it from bringing so much as it otherwise would do. Those 
arguments therefore produced the wished-for effect. The prohibi- 
tion of exporting gold and silver was in France and England con- 
fined to the coin of those respective countries. The exportation of 
foreign coin and of bullion was made free. In Holland, and in some 
other places, this liberty was extended even to the coin of the coun- 
try. The attention of government was turned away from guarding 
against the exportation of gold and silver, to watch over the balance 
of trade, as the only cause which could occasion any augmentation 
or diminution of those metals. From one fruitless care it was turned 
away to another care much more intricate, much more embnirass- 
ing, and just equally fruitless. The title of Mun’s book, Efigland^s 
Treasure in Foreign Trade, became a fundamental maxim in the 
political oeconomy, not of England only, but of all other commercial 
countries. The inland or home trade, the most important of all, the 
trade in which an equal capital affords the greatest revenue, and 
creates the greatest employment to the people of the country, was 
considered as subsidiary only to foreign trade. It neither brought 
money into the country, it was said, nor carried any out of it. The 
country therefore could never become either richer or poorer by 
means of it, except so far as its prosperity or decay might indirectly 
influence the state of foreign trade. 

A country that has no mines of its own must undoubtedly draw 
its gold and silver from foreign countries, in the same manner as 
one that has no vineyards of its own must draw its wines. It does 
not seem necessary, however, that the attention of government 
should be more turned towards the one than towards the other ob- 
ject. A country that has wherewithal to buy wine, will always get 
the wine which it has occasion for; and a country that has where- 
withal to buy gold and silver, will never be in want of those metals. 

“In” is a mistake for “by.” 


The ex- 
portation 
of foreign 
coin and 
bullion 
was per- 
mitted by 
France 
and Eng- 
land, and 
the ex- 
portation 
of Dutch 
coin by 
Holland. 

That 
treasure 
was ob- 
tained by 
foreign 
trade be- 
came a 
received 
maxim. 


Gold and 
silver will 
be im- 
ported 
without 
any at- 
tention of 
govern- 
ment. 



They can 
be im- 
ported 
more eas- 
ily than 
other 
commodi- 
ties when 
there is 
an effec- 
tual de- 
mand. 


When 
their 
quantity 
exceeds 
the de- 
mand it is 
impos- 
sible to 
prevent 
their ex- 
portation, 

and it 
would be 
equally 
impos- 
siMe to 
prevent 
their im- 


404 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

They are to be bought for a certain price like all other commodities, 
and as they are the price of all other commodities, so all other com- 
modities are the price of those metals. We trust with perfect se- 
curity that the freedom of trade, without any attention of govern- 
ment, will always supply us with the wine which we have occasion 
for: and we may trust with equal security that it will always supply 
us with all the gold and silver which we can afford to purchase or 
to employ, either in circulating our commodities, or in other uses. 

The quantity of every commodity which human industry can 
either purchase or produce, naturally regulates itself in every coun- 
try according to the effectual demand, or according to the demand 
of those who are willing to pay the whole rent, labour and profits 
which must be paid in order to prepare and bring it to market. But 
no commodities regulate themselves more easily or more exactly 
according to this effectual demand than gold and silver; because, 
on account of the small bulk and great value of those metals, no 
commodities can be more easily transported from one place to an- 
other, from the places where they are cheap, to those where they 
are dear, from the places where they exceed, to those where they fall 
short of this effectual demand. If there were in England, for ex- 
ample, an effectual demand for an additional quantity of gold, a 
paiet-boat could bring from Lisbon, or from wherever else it was 
to be had, fifty tuns of gold, which could be coined into more than 
five millions of guineas. But if there were an effectual demand for 
grain to the same value, to import it would require, at five guineas a 
tun, a million of tuns of shipping, or a thousand ships of a thousand 
tuns each. The navy of England would not be sufficient. 

When the quantity of gold and silver imported into any country 
exceeds the effectual demand, no vigilance of government can pre- 
vent their exportation. All the sanguinary laws of Spain and Portu- 
gal are not able to keep their gold and silver at home. The continual 
importations from Peru and Brazil exceed the effectual demand of 
those countries, and sink the price of those metals there below that 
in the neighbouring countries. If, on the contrary, in any particular 
country their quantity fell short of the effectual demand, so as to 
raise their price above that of the neighbouring countries, the 
government would have no occasion to take any pains to import 
them. If it were even to take pains to prevent their importation, it 
would not be able to effectuate it. Those metals, when the Spar- 
tans had got wherewithal to purchase them, broke through all the 
barriers which the laws of Lycurgus opposed to their entrance into 

“Here and four lines higher eds. 1-3 read “if there was.” 

“ Ed. I reads “in.” “ Eds. 1-3 read “if it was.” 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^5 

Lacedemon. All the san^inary laws of the customs are not able 
to prevent the importation of the teas of the Dutch and Gotten- 
burgh East India companies; because somewhat cheaper than those 
of the British company. A pound of tea, however, is about a hun- 
dred times the bulk of one of the highest prices, sixteen shillings, 
that is commonly paid for it in silver, and more than two thousand 
times the bulk of the same price in gold, and consequently just so 
many times more difficult to smuggle. 

It is partly owing to the easy transportation of gold and silver 
from the places where they abound to those where they are wanted, 
that the price of those ihetals does not fluctuate continually like 
that of the greater part of other commodities, which are hindered 
by their bulk from shifting their situation, when the market hap- 
pens to be either over or under-stocked with them. The price of 
those metals, indeed, is not altogether exempted from variation, but 
the changes to which it is liable are generally slow, gradual, and 
uniform. In Europe, for example, it is supposed, without much 
foundation, perhaps, that, during the course of the present and pre- 
ceding century, they have been constantly, but gradually, sinking 
in their value, on account of the continual importations from the 
Spanish West Indies.^^ But to make any sudden change in the price 
of gold and silver, so as to raise or lower at once, sensibly and re- 
markably, the money price of all other commodities, requires such a 
revolution in commerce as that occasioned by the discovery of 
America. 

If, notwithstanding all this, gold and silver should at any time 
fall short in a country which has wherewithal to purchase them, 
there are more expedients for supplying their place, than that of 
almost any other commodity. If the materials of manufacture are 
wanted, industry must stop. If provisions are wanted, the people 
must starve. But if money is wanted, barter will supply its place, 
though with a good deal of inconveniency. Buying and selling upon 
credit, and the different dealers compensating their credits with one 
another, once a month or once a year, will supply it with less incon- 
veniency. A well-regulated paper money will supply it, not only 
without any inconveniency, but, in some cases, with some advan- 
tages.^® Upon every account, therefore, the attention of government 
never was so unnecessarily employed, as when directed to watch 


The absence of any reference to the long Digression in bk. i., chap xi., 
suggests that this passage was written before the Digression was incorpora- 
ted in the work. Contrast the reference below, p 474. 

^*Ed. I reads “not only without any inconveniency but with very great 
advantages.” 


portation 
if the sup- 
ply fell 
short of 
the effec- 
tual de- 
mand. 


It is this 
ease of 
transpor- 
tation 
which 
makes the 
value of 
gold and 
silver so 
uniform. 


If they 
didfaU 
short, 
their 
place 
could be 
supplied 
by paper 



The com- 
mon com- 
plaint of 
scarcity 
of money 
only 
means 
difficulty 
in bor- 
rowing. 


Money 
makes but 
a small 
part of 
the na- 
tional 
capital. 

It is easier 
to buy 


406 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

over the preservation or increase of the quantity of money in any 
country. 

No complaint, however, is more common than that of a scarcity 
of money. j\Ioney, like wine, must always be scarce with those who 
have neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to borrow it. Those 
who have either, will seldom be in want either of the money, or of 
the wine which they have occasion for. This complaint, however, of 
the scarcity of money, is not always confined to improvident spend- 
thrifts. It is sometimes general through a whole mercantile town, 
and the country in its neighbourhood. Over-trading is the common 
cause of it. Sober men, whose projects have been disproportioned to 
their capitals, are as likely to have neither wherewithal to buy 
money, nor credit to borrow it, as prodigals whose expence has been 
disproportioned to their revenue. Before their projects can be 
brought to bear, their stock is gone, and their credit with it. They 
run about everywhere to borrow money, and every body tells them 
that they have none to lend. Even such general complaints of the 
scarcity of money do not always prove that the usual number of 
gold and silver pieces are not circulating in the country, but that 
many people want those pieces who have nothing to give for them. 
When the profits of trade happen to be greater than ordinary, over- 
trading becomes a general error both among great and small deal- 
ers. They do not always send more money abroad than usual, but 
they buy upon credit both at home and abroad, an unusual quan- 
tity of goods, which they send to some distant market, in hopes that 
the returns will come in before the demand for payment. The de- 
mand comes before the returns, and they have nothing at hand, 
with which they can either purdiase money, or give solid security 
for borrowing. It is not any scarcity of gold and silver, but the dif- 
ficulty which such people find in borrowing, and which their credi- 
tors find in getting payment, that occasions the general complaint 
of the scarcity of money. 

It would be too ridiculous to go about seriously to prove, that 
wealth does not consist in money, or in gold and silver; but in what 
money purchases, and is valuable only for purchasing. Money, no 
doubt, makes always a part of the national capital; but it has al- 
ready been shown that it generally makes but a small part, and 
always the most unprofitable part of it. 

It is not because wealth consists more essentially in money than 
in goods, that the merchant finds it generally more easy to buy 

pis probably refers to p. 280, though the object there is rather to insist 
on the largeness of the saving effected by dispensing with money, and pp. 
270-276. 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^7 

goods with money, than to buy money with goods; but because 
money is the known and established instrument of commerce, for 
which every thing is readily given in exchange, but which is not al- 
ways with equal readiness to be got in exchange for every thing. 
The greater part of goods besides are more perishable than money, 
and he may frequently sustain a much greater loss by keeping 
them. When his goods are upon hand too, he is more liable to such 
demands for money as he may not be able to answer, than when he 
has got their price in his coffers. Over and above all this, his profit 
arises more directly from selling than from buying, and he is upon 
all these accounts generally much more anxious to exchange his 
goods for money, than his money for goods. But though a particu- 
lar merchant, with abundance of goods in his warehouse, may some- 
times be mined by not being able to sell them in time, a nation or 
country is not liable to the same accident. The whole capital of a 
merchant frequently consists in perishable goods destined for pur- 
chasing money. But it is but a very small part of the annual prod- 
uce of the land and labour of a country which can ever be destined 
for purchasing gold and silver from their neighbours. The far great- 
er part is circulated and consumed among themselves; and even of 
the surplus which is sent abroad, the greater part is generally des- 
tined for the purchase of other foreign goods. Though gold and sil- 
ver, therefore, could not be had in exchange for the goods destined 
to purchase them, the nation would not be mined. It might, indeed, 
suffer some loss and inconveniency, and be forced upon some of 
those expedients which are necessary for supplying the place of 
money. The annual produce of its land and labour, however, would 
be the same, or very nearly the same, as usual, because the same, or 
very nearly the same consumable capital would be employed in 
maintaining it. And though goods do not always draw money so 
readily as money draws goods, in the long-run they draw it more 
necessarily than even it draws them. Goods can serve many other 
purposes besides purchasing money, but money can serve no other 
purpose besides purchasing goods. Money, therefore, necessarily 
runs after goods, but goods do not always or necessarily run after 
money. The man who buys, does not always mean to sell again, but 
frequently to use or to consume: whereas he who sells, always 
means to buy again. The one may frequently have done the whole, 
but the other can never have done more than the one-half of his 
business. It is not for its own sake that men desire money, but for 
the sake of what they can purchase with it. 

Consumable commodities, it is said, are soon destroyed; whereas 
gold and silver are of a more durable nature, and, were it not for 


than to 
sell simply 
because 
money is 
the in- 
strument 
of com- 
merce. 


The dura 
bilityof a 



commod- 
ity is no 
reason for 
accumu- 
lating 
more of it 
than IS 
wanted. 


408 the wealth of nations 

this continual exportation, might be accumulated for ages together, 
to the incredible augmentation of the real wealth of the country. 
Nothing, therefore, it is pretended, can be more disadvantageous to 
any country, than the trade which consists m the exchange of such 
lasting for such perishable commodities. We do not, however, reck- 
on that trade disadvantageous which consists in the exchange of 
the hard-ware of England for the wines of France; and yet hard- 
ware is a very durable commodity, and were it not for this con- 
tinual exportation, might too be accumulated for ages together, to 
the incredible augmentation of the pots and pans of the country. 
But it readily occurs that the number of such utensils is in every 
country necessarily limited by the use which there is for them; that 
it would be absurd to have more pots and pans than were necessary 
for cooking the victuals usually consumed there; and that if the 
quantity of victuals were to increase, the number of pots and pans 
would readily increase along with it, a part of the increased quan- 
tity of victuals being employed in purchasing them, or in maintain- 
ing an additional number of workmen whose business it was to 
make them. It should as readily occur that the quantity of gold and 
silver is in every country limited by the use which there is for those 
metals; that their use consists in circulating commodities as coin, 
and in affording a species of houshold furniture as plate; that the 
quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the 
commodities which are to be circulated by it: increase that value, 
and immediately a part of it will be sent abroad to purchase, where- 
ever it is to be had, the additional quantity of coin requisite for cir- 
culating them: that the quantity of plate is regulated by the num- 
ber and wealth of those private families who chuse to indulge them- 
selves in that sort of magnificence: increase the number and wealth 
of such families, and a part of this increased wealth will most prob- 
ably be employed in purchasing, wherever it is to be found, an 
additional quantity of plate: that to attempt to increase the wealth 
of any country, either by introducing or by detaining in it an un- 
necessary quantity of gold and silver, is as absurd as it would be to 
attempt to increase the good cheer of private families, by obliging 
them to keep an unnecessary number of kitchen utensils. As the ex- 
pence of purchasing those unnecessary utensils would diminish in- 
stead of increasing either the quantity or goodness of the family 
provisions; so the expence of purchasing an unnecessary quantity 
of gold and silver must, in every country, as necessarily diminish 
the wealth which feeds, clothes, and lodges, which maintains and 
employs the people. Gold and silver, whether in the shape of coin or 

Eds. 1-3 read “was it not 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM W 

plate, are utensils, it must be remembered, as much as the furniture 
of the kitchen. Increase the use for them, increase the consumable 
commodities which are to be circulated, managed, and prepared by 
means of them, and you will infallibly increase the quantity; but if 
you attempt, by extraordinary means, to increase the quantity, you 
will as infallibly diminish the use and even the quantity too, which 
in those metals can never be greater than what the use requires. 
Were they ever to be accumulated beyond this quantity, their 
transportation is so easy, and the loss which attends their lying idle 
and unemployed so great, that no law could prevent their being im- 
mediately sent out of the country. 

It is not always necessary to accumulate gold and silver, in order 
to enable a country to carry on foreign wars, and to maintain fleets 
and armies in distant countries. Fleets and armies are maintained, 
not with gold and silver, but with consumable goods. The nation 
which, from the annual produce of its domestic industry, from the 
annual revenue arising out of its lands, labour, and consumable 
stock, has wherewithal to purchase those consumable goods in dis- 
tant countries, can maintain foreign wars there. 

A nation may purchase the pay and provisions of an army in a 
distant country three different ways; by sending abroad either, 
first, some part of its accumulated gold and silver; or secondly, 
some part of the annual produce of its manufactures; or last of all, 
some part of its annual rude produce. 

The gold and silver which can properly be considered as accumu- 
lated or stored up in any country, may be distinguished into three 
parts; •first, the circulating money; secondly, the plate of private 
families; and last of all, the money which may have been collected 
by many years parsimony, and laid up in the treasury of the prince. 

It can seldom happen that much can be spared from the circu- 
lating money of the country; because in that there can seldom be 
much redundancy. The value of goods annually bought and sold in 
any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and 
distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give employ- 
ment to no more. The channel of circulation necessarily draws to it- 
self a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more. Some- 
thing, however, is generally withdrawn from this channel in the 
case of foreign war. By the great number of people who are main- 
tained abroad, fewer are maintained at home. Fewer goods are cir- 
culated there, and less money becomes necessary to circulate them. 
An extraordinary quantity of paper money, of some sort or other 
too, such as exchequer notes, navy bills, and bank bills in England, 
is generally issued upon such occasions, and by supplying the place 


Accumu- 
lation of 
gold and 
silver is 
not neces- 
sary for 
carrying 
on distant 
wars, 


which 
ma> be 
paid for 
by export- 
ing. (i) 
gold and 
silver, (2) 
manufac- 
tures, or 
(3) rude 
produce 

The gold 
and Slver 
consists of 
money in 
circula- 
tion, 

plate, and 
money in 
thetreas- 
ury. 

Little can 
be spared 
from the 
money in 
circula- 
tion; 



410 


plate has 
never 
yielded 
m ich; 

accumula- 
tion in the 
treasury 
has been 
aban- 
doned. 

The 
foreign 
wars of 
the cen- 
tury have 
evidently 
not been 
paid for 
from the 
money in 
circula- 
tion. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

of circulating gold and silver, gives an opportunity of sending a 
greater quantity of it abroad. All this, however, could afford but a 
poor resource for maintaining a foreign war, of great expence and 
several years duration. 

The melting down the plate of private families, has upon every 
occasion been found a still more insignificant one. The French, in 
the beginning of the last war, did not derive so much advantage 
from this expedient as to compensate the loss of the fashion. 

The accumulated treasures of the prince have, in former times, 
afforded a much greater and more lasting resource. In the present 
times, if you except the king of Prussia, to accumulate treasure 
seems to be no part of the policy of European princes. 

The funds which maintained the foreign wars of the present cen- 
tury, the most expensive perhaps which history records, seem to 
have had little dependency upon the exportation either of the cir- 
culating money, or of the plate of private families, or of the treas- 
ure of the prince. The last French war cost Great Britain upwards 
of ninety millions, including not only the seventy-five millions of 
new debt that was contracted,^® but the additional two shillings in 
the pound land tax, and what was annually borrowed of the sink- 
ing fund. More than two-thirds of this expence were®® laid out in 
distant countries; in Germany, Portugal, America, in the ports of 
the Mediterranean, in the East and West Indies. The kings of Eng- 
land had no accumulated treasure. We never heard of any extra- 
ordinary quantity of plate being melted down. The circulating gold 
and silver of the country had not been supposed to exceed eighteen 
millions. Since the late recoinage of the gold, however, *it is be- 
lieved to have been a good deal under-rated. Let us suppose, there- 
fore, according to the most exaggerated computation which I re- 
member to have either seen or heard of,®^ that, gold and silver to- 
gether, it amounted to thirty millions.®® Had the war been carried 
on, by means of our money, the whole of it must, even according to 
this computation, have been sent out and returned again at least 
twice, in a period of between six and seven years. Should this be 
supposed, it would afford the most decisive argument to demon- 
strate how unnecessary it is for government to watch over the pre- 
servation of money, since upon this supposition the whole money of 
the country must have gone from it and returned to it again, two 
different times in so short a period, without any body’s knowing 
any thing of the matter. The (iannel of circulation, however, never 

^Present State of the Nation (see next page and note), p. 28 

Eds. 1-3 read “was.” >> h o. 

^Ed. I reads “according to the exaggerated computation of Mr. Horsely.” 

Lectures, p, igg, ^ 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^1 

appeared more empty than usual during any part of this period. 
Few people wanted money who had wherewithal to pay for it. The 
profits of foreign trade, indeed, were greater than usual during the 
whole war; but especially towards the end of it. This occasioned, 
what it always occasions, a general over-trading in all the ports of 
Great Britain; and this again occasioned the usual complaint of the 
scarcity of money, which always follows over-trading. jMany people 
wanted it, who had neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to bor- 
row it; and because the debtors found it difficult to borrow, the 
creditors found it difficult to get payment. Gold and silver, how- 
ever, were generally to be had for their value, by those who had 
that value to give for them. 

The enormous expence of the late war, therefore, must have been 
chiefly defrayed, not by the exportation of gold and silver, but by 
that of British commodities of some kind or other. When the gov- 
ernment, or those who acted under them, contracted with a mer- 
chant for a remittance to some foreign country, he would naturally 
endeavour to pay his foreign correspondent, upon wbom he had 
granted a bill, by sending abroad rather commodities than gold and 
silver. If the commodities of Great Britain were not in demand in 
that country, he would endeavour to send them to some other coun- 
try, in which he could purchase a bill upon that country. The trans- 
portation of commodities, when properly suited to the market, is 
always attended with a considerable profit; whereas that of gold 
and silver is scarce ever attended with any. When those metals are 
sent abroad in order to purchase foreign commodities, the mer- 
chant’s profit arises, not from the purchase, but from the sale of the 
returns. But when they are sent abroad merely to pay a debt, he 
gets no returns, and consequently no profit. He naturally, therefore, 
exerts his invention to find out a way of paying his foreign debts, 
rather by the exportation of commodities than by that of gold and 
silver. The great quantity of British goods exported during the 
course of the late war, without bringing back any returns, is ac- 
cordingly remarked by the author of The Present State of the Na- 
tion.^^ 

Besides the three sorts of gold and silver above mentioned, there 
is in all great commercial countries a good deal of bullion alternate- 
ly imported and exported for the purposes of foreign trade. This 
bullion, as it circulates among different commercial countries in the 
same manner as the national coin circulates in every particular 

^The Present State of the Nation, particularly with respect to its Trade, 
Finances, etc., etc., addressed to the King and both Houses of Parliament, 
1768 (written under the direction of George Grenville by William Knox), pp. 
7 , 8 . 


but by 
commodi • 
ties. 


Part of 
the bul- 
lion 

which cir- 
culates 
from 

country to 



country 
may have 
been em- 
ployed, 
but it 
must have 
been pur- 
chased 
with 

commodi- 

ties. 


The finer 
manufac- 
tures are 
the most 
conve- 
nient 
commodi- 
ties for 
the pur- 
pose. 


4 ^^ THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

country, may be considered as the money of the great mercantile 
republic. The national coin receives its movement and direction 
from the commodities circulated within the precincts of each par- 
ticular country: the money of the mercantile republic, from those 
circulated between different countries. Both are employed in facili- 
tating exchanges, the one between different individuals of the same, 
the other between those of different nations. Part of this money of 
the great mercantile republic may have been, and probably was, 
employed in carrying on the late war. In time of a general war, it is 
natural to suppose that a movement and direction should be im- 
pressed upon it, different from what it usually follows in profound 
peace; that it should circulate more about the seat of the war, and 
be more employed in purchasing there, and in the neighbouring 
countries, the pay and provisions of the Afferent armies. But what- 
ever part of this money of the mercantile republic, Great Britain 
may have annually employed in this manner, it must have been an- 
nuity purchased, either with British commodities, or with some- 
thing else that had been purchased with them; which still brings us 
back to commodities, to the annual produce of the land and labour 
of the country, as the ultimate resources which enabled us to carry 
on the war. It is natural indeed to suppose, that so great an annual 
expence must have been defrayed from a great annual produce. The 
expence of 1761, for example, amounted to more than nineteen mil- 
lions. No accumulation could have supported so great an annual 
profusion. There is no annual produce even of gold and silver which 
could have supported it. The whole gold and silver annually im- 
ported into both Spain and Portugal, according to the best ac- 
counts, does not commonly much exceed six millions sterling, 
which, in some years, would scarce have paid four months expence 
of the late war. 

The commodities most proper for being transported to distant 
countries, in order to purchase there, either the pay and provisions 
of an army, or some part of the money of the mercantile republic 
to be employed in purchasing them, seem to be the finer and more 
improved manufactures; such as contain a great value in a small 
bulk, and can, therefore, be exported to a great distance at little 
expence. A country whose industry produces a great annual surplus 
of such manufactures, which are usually exported to foreign coun- 
tries, may carry on for many years a very expensive foreign war, 
without either exporting any considerable quantity of gold and sil- 
ver, or even having any such quantity to export. A considerable 


Above, pp. 208, 209, 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^3 

part of the annual surplus of its manufactures must, indeed, in this 
case be exported, without bringing back any returns to the country, 
though it does to the merchant; the government purchasing of the 
mercjiant his bills upon foreign countries, in order to purchase 
there the pay and provisions of an army. Some part of this surplus, 
however, may still continue to bring back a return.^^ The manufac- 
turers, during the war, will have a double demand upon them, and 
be called upon, first, to work up goods to be sent abroad, for paying 
the bills drawn upon foreign countries for the pay and provisions 
of the army; and, secondly, to work up such as are necessary for 
purchasing the common returns that had usually been consumed in 
the country. In the midst of the most destructive foreign war, there- 
fore, the greater part of manufactures may frequently flourish 
greatly; and, on the contrary, they may decline on the return of 
the peace. They may flourish amidst the ruin of their country, and 
begin to decay upon the return of its prosperity. The different state 
of many different branches of the British manufactures during the 
late war, and for some time after the peace, may serve as an illus- 
tration of what has been just now said. 

No foreign war of great expence or duration could conveniently 
be carried on by the exportation of the rude produce of the soil, 

The expence of sending such a quantity of it to a foreign country venient. 
as might purchase the pay and provisions of an army, would be too 
great. Few countries too produce much more rude produce than 
what is sufficient for the subsistence of their own inhabitants- To 
send abroad any great quantity of it, therefore, would be to send 
abroad a part of the necessary subsistence of the people. It is other- 
wise with the exportation of manufactures. The maintenance of the 
people employed in them is kept at home, and only the surplus part 
of their work is exported. Mr. Hume frequently takes notice of the 
inability of the ancient kings of England to carry on, without in- 
terruption, any foreign war of long duration.-*^ The English, in 
those days, had nothing wherewithal to purchase the pay and pro- 
visions of their armies in foreign countries, but either the rude 
produce of the soil, of which no considerable part could be spared 
from the home consumption, or a few manufactures of the coarsest 
kind, of which, as well as of the rude produce, the transportation 
was too expensive. This inability did not arise from the want of 

^ In place of these two sentences ed. i reads “A considerable part of the 
annual surplus of its manufactures must indeed in this case be exported with- 
out bringing back any returns. Some part of it, however, may still continue 
to bring back a return.” 

^History, chaps, xix. and xx., vol. iii., pp. 103, 104, 165 in ed. of 1773. 



414 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

money, but of the finer and more improved manufactures. Buying 
and selling was transacted by means of money in England then, as 
well as now. The quantity of circulating money must have borne 
the same proportion to the number and value of purchases and.sales 
usually transacted at that time, which it does to those transacted at 
present; or rather it must have borne a greater proportion, because 
there was then no paper, which now occupies a great part of the 
employment of gold and silver. Among nations to whom commerce 
and manufactures are little known, the sovereign, upon extraor- 
dinary occasions, can seldom draw any considerable aid from his 
subjects, for reasons which shall be explained hereafter.^'^ It is in 
such countries, therefore, that he generally endeavours to accumu- 
late a treasure, as the only resource against such emergencies. In- 
dependent of this necessity, he is in such a situation naturally dis- 
posed to the parsimony requisite for accumulation. In that simple 
state, the expence even of a sovereign is not directed by the vanity 
which delights in the gaudy finery of a court, but is employed in 
bounty to his tenants, and hospitdity to his retainers. But bounty 
and hospitality very seldom lead to extravagance; though vanity 
almost always does.^^ Every Tartar chief, accordingly, has a treas- 
ure. The treasures of Mazepa, chief of the Cossacks in the Ukraine, 
the famous ally of Charles the Xllth, are said to have been very 
great. The French kings of the Merovingian race had all treasures. 
When they divided their kingdom among their different children, 
they divided their treasure too. The Saxon princes, and the first 
kings after the conquest, seem likewise to have accumulated treas- 
ures. The first exploit of every new reign was commonly to seize the 
treasure of the preceding king, as the most essential measure for 
securing the succession. The sovereigns of improved and commer- 
cial countries are not under the same necessity of accumulating 
treasures, because they can generally draw from their subjects ex- 
traordinary aids upon extraordinary occasions. They are likewise 
less disposed to do so. They naturally, perhaps necessarily, follow 
the mode of the times, and their expence comes to be regulated by 
the same extravagant vanity which directs that of all the other 
great proprietors in their dominions. The insignificant pageantry of 
their court becomes every day more brilliant, and the expence of it 
not only prevents accumulation, but frequently encroaches upon 
the funds destined for more necessary expences. What Dercyllidas 
said of the court of Persia, may be applied to that of several Euro- 

^ Below, p. S63. 

“ This sentence and the nine words before it are repeated below, p. 860. 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^5 

pean princes, that he saw there much splendor but little strength, 
and many servants but few soldiers.-^ 

The importation of gold and silver is not the principal, much less 
the sole benefit which a nation derives from its foreign trade. Be- 
tween whatever places foreign trade is carried on, they all of them 
derive two distinct benefits from it. It carries out that surplus part 
of the produce of their land and labour for which there is no de- 
mand among them, and brings back in return for it something else 
for which there is a demand. It gives a value to their superfluities, 
by exchanging them for something else, which may satisfy a part of 
their wants, and increase their enjoyments. By means of it, the 
narrowness of the home market does not hinder the division of la- 
bour in any particular branch of art or manufacture from being 
carried to the highest perfection. By opening a more extensive mar- 
ket for whatever part of the produce of their labour may exceed the 
home consumption, it encourages them to improve its productive 
powers, and to augment its annual produce to the utmost, and 
thereby to increase the real revenue and wealth of the society. 
These great and important services foreign trade is continually oc- 
cupied in performing, to all the different countries between which 
it is carried on. They all derive great benefit from it, though that in 
which the merchant resides generally derives the greatest, as he is 
generally more employed in supplying the wants, and carrying out 
the superfluities of his own, than of any other particular country. 
To import the gold and silver which may be wanted, into the coun- 
tries which have no mines, is, no doubt, a part of the business of 
foreign commerce. It is, however, a most insignificant part of it. A 
country which carried on foreign trade merely upon this account, 
could scarce have occasion to freight a ship in a century. 

It is not by the importation of gold and silver, that the discovery 
of America has enriched Europe. By the abundance of the Ameri- 
can mines, those metals have become cheaper. A service of plate can 
now be purchased for about a third part of the corn, or a third part 
of the labour, which it would have cost in the fifteenth century. 
With the same annual expence of labour and commodities, Europe 
can annually purchase about three times the quantity of plate 
which it could have purchased at that time. But when a commodity 
comes to be sold for a third part of what had been its usual price, 
not only those who purchased it before can purchase three times 
their former quantity, but it is brought down to the level of a much 

“Dercyllidas” appears to be a mistake for Antiochus See Xenophon, Hel- 
lenica, vii., i., § 38. 

^ Ed. I reads “thereby increase.” 


The prin- 
cipal 

benefit of 
foreign 
trade 1 
not th^ 
importa- 
tion of 
gold and 
Slver, but 
the carry- 
ing out of 
surplus 
produce 
for which 
there is 
no de- 
mand and 
bringing 
back 

something 
for which 
there is. 


The dis- 
covery of 
America 
has bene- 
fited 
Europe 
not by the 
cheapen- 
ing of 
gold and 
silver, 



but by 
opening 
up of a 
new mar- 
ket which 
improved 
the pro- 
ductive 
powers of 
labour. 


The dis- 
covery of 
the sea 
passage to 
the East 
Indies 
would 
have been 
still more 
advan- 
tageous if 
the trade 
to the 
East 
Indies 
had been 
free. 


416 the wealth of nations 

greater number of purchasers, perhaps to more than ten, perhaps 
to more than twenty times the former number. So that there may 
be in Europe at present not only more than three times, but more 
than twenty or thirty times the quantity of plate which would have 
been in it, even in its present state of improvement, had the discov- 
ery of the American mines never been made. So far Europe has, no 
doubt, gained a real conveniency, though surely a very trifling one- 
The cheapness of gold and silver renders those metals rather les"^ 
fit for the purposes of money than they were before. In order t^ 
make the same purchases, we must load ourselves with a greater 
quantity of them, and carry about a shilling in our pocket where a 
groat would have done before. It is difficult to say which is most 
trifling, this inconveniency, or the opposite conveniency. Neither 
the one nor the other could have made any very essential change in 
the state of Europe. The discovery of America, however, certainly 
made a most essential one. By opening a new and inexhaustible 
market to all the commodities of Europe, it gave occasion to new 
divisions of labour and improvements of art, which, in the narrow 
circle of the ancient commerce, could never have taken place for 
want of a market to take off the greater part of their produce. The 
productive powers of labour were improved, and its produce in- 
creased in all the different countries of Europe, and together with it 
the real revenue and wealth of the inhabitants. The commodities of 
Europe were almost all new to America, and many of those of Am- 
erica were new to Europe. A new set of exchanges, therefore, began 
to take place which had never been thought of before, and which 
should naturally have proved as advantageous to the new, as it 
certainly did to the old continent. The savage injustice of the Euro- 
peans rendered an event, which ought to have been beneficial to all, 
ruinous and destructive to several of those unfortunate countries. 

The discovery of a passage to the East Indies, by the Cape of 
Good Hope, which happened much about the same time, opened, 
perhaps, a still more extensive range to foreign commerce than even 
that of America, notwithstanding the greater distance. There were 
but two nations in America, in any respect superior to savages, and 
these were destroyed almost as soon as discovered. The rest were 
mere savages. But the empires of China, Indostan, Japan, as well as 
several others in the East Indies, without having richer mines of 
gold or silver, were in every other respect much richer, better culti- 
vated, and more advanced in all arts and manufactures than either 
Mexico or Peru, even though we should credit, what plainly de- 
serves no credit, the exaggerated accounts of the Spanish writers, 
concerning the ancient state of those empires. But rich and civilized 



PRINCIPLE OP THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4i7 

nations can always exchange to a much greater value with one an- 
other, than with savages and barbarians. Europe, however, has 
hitherto derived much less advantage from its commerce with the 
East Indies, than from that with America. The Portuguese monopo- 
lized the East India trade to themselves for about a century, and it 
was only indirectly and through them, that the other nations of 
Europe could either send out or receive any goods from that coun- 
try. When the Dutch, in the beginning of the last century, began 
to encroach upon them, they vested their whole East India com- 
merce in an exclusive company. The English, French, Swedes, and 
Danes, have all followed their example, so that no great nation in 
Europe has ever yet had the benefit of a free commerce to the East 
Indies. No other reason need be assigned why it has never been so 
advantageous as the trade to America, which, between almost every 
nation of Europe and its own colonies, is free to all its subjects. 
The exclusive privileges of those East India companies, their great 
riches, the great favour and protection which these have procured 
them from their respective governments, have excited much envy 
against them. This envy has frequently represented their trade as 
altogether pernicious, on account of the great quantities of silver, 
which it every year exports from the countries from which it is car- 
ried on. The parties concerned have replied, that their trade, by this 
continual exportation of silver, might, indeed, tend to impoverish 
Europe in general, but not the particular country from which it was 
carried on; because, by the exportation of a part of the returns to 
other European countries, it annually brought home a much greater 
quantity of that metal than it carried out. Both the objection and 
the reply are founded in the popular notion which I have been just 
now examining. It is, therefore, unnecessary to say any thing fur- 
ther about either. By the annual exportation of silver to the East 
Indies, plate is probably somewhat dearer in Europe than it other- 
wise might have been; and coined silver probably purchases a 
larger quantity both of labour and commodities. The former of 
these two effects is a very small loss, the latter a very small advan- 
tage; both too insignificant to deserve any part of the public at- 
tention. The trade to the East Indies, by opening a market to the 
commodities of Europe, or, what comes nearly to the same thing, 
to the gold and silver which is purchased with those commodities, 
must necessarily tend to increase the annual production of Euro- 
pean commodities, and consequently the real wealth and revenue of 
Europe. .That it has hitherto increased them so little, is probably 
owing to the restraints which it every-where labours under. 

I thought it necessary, though at the hazard of being tedious, to 


The ex- 
portation 
of silver 
to the 
East 
Indies is 
not harm- 
ful. 



Writers 
who begin 
by includ- 
ing lands, 
houses 
and con- 
sumable 
goods in 
wealth 
often for- 
get them 
later. 


Wealth 
being sup- 
posed to 
consist in 
gold and 
silver, po- 
litical 
economy 
endeav- 
oured to 
diminish 
imports 
and en- 
courage 
exports, 

by res- 
traints 
upon im- 
portation 


and en- 
courage- 
ments to 
exporta- 
tion, 


41S the wealth of nations 

examine at full length this popular notion that wealth consists in 
money, or in gold and silver, iloney in common language, as I have 
already observed, frequently signifies wealth; and this ambiguity 
of expression has rendered this popular notion so familiar to us, 
that even they, w^ho are convinced of its absurdity, are very apt to 
forget their own principles, and in the course of their reasonings to 
take it for granted as a certain and undeniable truth. Some of the 
best English writers upon commerce set out with observing, that 
the wealth of a country consists, not in its gold and silver only, but 
in its lands, houses, and consumable goods of all different kinds. In 
the course of their reasonings, however, the lands, houses, and con- 
sumable goods seem to slip out of their memory, and the strain of 
their argument frequently supposes that all wealth consists in gold 
and silver, and that to multiply those metals is the great object of 
national industry and commerce. 

The two principles being established, however, that wealth con- 
sisted in gold and silver, and that those metals could be brought 
into a country which had no mines only by the balance of trade, or 
by exporting to a greater value than it imported; it necessarily be- 
came the great object of political (economy to diminish as much as 
possible the importation of foreign goods for home consumption, 
and to increase as much as possible the exportation of the produce 
of domestic industry. Its two great engines for enriching the coun- 
try, therefore, were restraints upon importation, and encourage- 
ments to exportation. 

The restraints upon importation were of two kinds. 

First, Restraints upon the importation of such foreign goods for 
home consumption as could be produced at home, from whatever 
country they were imported. 

Secondly, Restraints upon the importation of goods of almost all 
kinds from those particular countries with which the balance of 
trade was supposed to be disadvantageous. 

Those different restraints consisted sometimes in high duties, and 
sometimes in absolute prohibitions. 

Exportation was encouraged sometimes by drawbacks, some- 
times by bounties, sometimes by advantageous treaties of com- 
merce with foreign states, and sometimes by the establishment of 
colonies in distant countries. 

Drawbacks were given upon two different occasions. When the 
home-manufactures were subject to any duty or excise, either the 
whole or a part of it was frequently drawn back upon their exporta- 
tion; and when foreign goods liable to a duty were imported in 



PRINCIPLE OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM 4^9 

order to be exported again, either the whole or a part of this duty 
was sometimes given back upon such exportation. 

Bounties were given for the encouragement either of some be- 
ginning manufactures, or of such sorts of industry of other kinds 
as were supposed to deserve particular favour. 

By advantageous treaties of commerce, particular privileges 
were procured in some foreign state for the go^s and merchants of 
the country, beyond what were granted to those of other countries. 

By the establishment of colonies in distant countries, not only 
particular privileges, but a monopoly was frequently procured for 
the goods and merchants of the country which established them. 

The two sorts of restraints upon importation above-mentioned, 
together with these four encouragements to exportation, constitute 
the six principal means by which the commercial system proposes 
to increase the quantity of gold and silver in any country by turn- 
ing the balance of trade in its favour. I ^all consider each of them 
in a particular chapter, and without taking much further notice of 
their supposed tendency to bring money into the country, I shall 
examine chiefly what are likely to be the effects of each of them up- 
on the annual produce of its industry. According as they tend either 
to increase or diminish the value of this annual produce, they must 
evidently tend either to increase or dimmish the real wealth and 
revenue of the country. 


which re- 
straints 
and en- 
courage- 
ments 
will be 
considered 
in the 
next six 
chapters. 



f 


High 

duties and 
prohibi- 
tions 
giving a 
monopoly 
to a par- 
ticular 
home in- 
dustry 
are very 
common. 


They en- 
courage 
the par- 
ticular in- 
dustry, 


CHAPTER II 

OF RESTRAINTS UPON THE IMPORTATION FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES 
OF SUCH GOODS AS CAN BE PRODUCED AT HOME 

By restraining, either by high duties, or by absolute prohibitions, 
the importation of such goods from foreign countries as can be pro- 
duced at home, the monopoly of the home market is more or less 
secured to the domestic industry employed in producing them. Thus 
the prohibition of importing either live cattle ^ or salt provisions 
from foreign countries secures to the graziers of Great Britain the 
monopoly of the home market for butcher’s meat. The high duties 
upon the importation of corn,^ which in times of moderate plenty 
amount to a prohibition, give a like advantage to the growers of 
that commodity. The prohibition of the importation of foreign 
woollens is equally favourable to the woollen manufacturers.^ The 
silk manufacture, though altogether employed upon foreign mate- 
rials, has lately obtained the same advantage.^ The linen manufac- 
ture has not yet obtained it, but is making great strides towards it.^ 
Many other sorts of manufacturers ® have, in the same manner, ob- 
tained in Great Britain, either altogether, or very nearly a mon- 
opoly against their countrymen. The variety of goods of which the 
importation into Great Britain is prohibited, either absolutely, or 
under certain circumstances, greatly exceeds what can easily be 
suspected by those who are not well acquainted with the laws of the 
customs."^ 

That this monopoly of the home-market frequently gives great 
encouragement to that particular species of industry which enjoys 
it, and frequently turns towards that employment a greater share 
of both the labour and stock of the society than would otherwise 
have gone to it, cannot be doubted. But whether it tends either to 

^ See above, p. 394. ^ See below, pp, 502, 503. 

* II and 12 Ed. III., c. 3; 4 Ed#iV., c. 7. ^6 Geo. III., c. 28. 

® By the additional duties, 7 Geo. III., c. 28. 

^Misprinted “manufactures” in ed. 5. 

^ This sentence appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. 

420 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4^^ 

increase the general industry of the society, or to give it the most 
advantageous direction, is not, perhaps, altogether so evident.*^ 

The general industry of the society never can exceed what the 
capital of the society can employ. As the number of workmen that 
can be kept in employment by any particular person must bear a 
certain proportion to his capital, so the number of those that can 
be continually employed by all the members of a great society, must 
bear a certain proportion to the whole capital of that society, and 
never can exceed that proportion. No regulation of commerce can 
increase the quantity of industry in any society beyond what its 
capital can maintain. It can only divert a part of it into a direction 
into which it might not otherwise have gone; and it is by no means 
certam that this artificial direction is likely to be more advantage- 
ous to the society than that into which it would have gone of its own 
accord. 

Every individual is continually exerting himself to find out the 
most advantageous employment for whatever capital he can com- 
mand. It is his own advantage, indeed, and not that of the society, 
which he has in view. But the study of his own advantage naturally, 
or rather necessarily leads him to prefer that employment which is 
most advantageous to the society. 

First, every individual endeavours to employ his capital as near 
home as he can, and consequently as much as he can in the support 
of domestic industry; provided always that he can thereby obtain 
the ordinary, or not a great deal less than the ordinary profits of 
stock. 

Thus, upon equal or nearly equal profits, every wholesale mer- 
chant naturally prefers the home-trade to the foreign trade of con- 
sumption, and the foreign trade of consumption to the carrying 
trade. In the home-trade his capital is never so long out of his sight 
as it frequently is in the foreign trade of consumption. He can know 
better the character and situation of the persons whom he trusts, 
and if he should happen to be deceived, he knows better the laws of 
the country from which he must seek redress. In the carrying trade, 
the capital of the merchant is, as it were, divided between two for- 
eign countries, and no part of it is ever necessarily brought home, or 
placed under his own immediate view and command. The capital 
which an Amsterdam nierchant employs in carrying corn from 
Konnigsberg to Lisbon, and fruit and wine from Lisbon to Kon- 
nigsberg, must generally be the one-half of it at Konnigsberg and 
the other half at Lisbon. No part of it need ever come to Amster- 
dam. The natural residence of such a merchant should either be at 
® Ed, I reads “certam.” 


but nei- 
ther in- 
crease 
general 
industry 
nor give 
it the best 
direction. 

The num- 
ber of 
persons 
emplo} ed 
cannot 
exceed a 
certain 
propor- 
tion to the 
capital of 
the so- 
ciety, 

and every 
man’s in- 
terest 
leads him 
to seek 
that em- 
ployment 
of capital 
which is 
most ad- 
vanta- 
geous to 
the so- 
ciety. 

(I) He 
tries to 
employ it 
as near 
home as 
posable. 



422 


THE WEAXTH OF NATIONS 

Konnigsberg or Lisbon, and it can only be some very particular 
circumstances which can make him prefer the residence of Amster- 
dam, The uneasiness, however, which he feels at being separated 
so far from his capital, generally determines him to bring part 
both of the Konnigsberg goods which he destines for the market of 
Lisbon, and of the Lisbon goods which he destines for that of Kon- 
nigsberg, to Amsterdam: and though this necessarily subjects him 
to a double charge of loading and unloading, as well as to the pay- 
ment of some duties and customs, yet for the sake of having some 
part of his capital always under his own view and command, he 
willingly submits to this extraordinary charge; and it is in this 
manner that every country which has any considerable share of 
the carrying trade, becomes always the emporium, or general mar- 
ket, for the goods of all the different countries whose trade it car- 
ries on. The merchant, in order to save a second loading and un- 
loading, endeavours always to sell in the home-market as much of 
the goods of all those different countries as he can, and thus, so 
far as he can, to convert his carrying trade into a foreign trade of 
consumption. A merchant, in the same manner, who is engaged in 
the foreign trade of consumption, when he collects goods for for- 
eign markets, will always be glad, upon equal or nearly equal pro- 
fits, to sell as great a part of them at home as he can. He saves 
himself the risk and trouble of exportation, when, so far as he can, 
he thus converts his foreign trade of consumption into a home- 
trade. Home is in this manner the center, if I may say so, round 
which the capitals of the inhabitants of every country are contin- 
ually circulating, and towards which they are always tending, 
though by particular causes they may sometimes be driven off and 
repelled from it towards more distant employments. But a capital 
employed in the home-trade, it has already been shown, ^ neces- 
sarily puts into motion a greater quantity of domestic industry, and 
gives revenue and employment to a greater number of the inhabit- 
ants of the country, than an equal capital employed in the foreign 
trade of consumption: and one employed in the foreign trade of 
consumption has the same advantage over an equal capital em- 
ployed in the carrying trade. Upon equal, or only nearly equal pro- 
fits, therefore, every individual naturally inclines to employ his 
capital in the manner in which it is likely to afford the greatest 
support to domestic industry, and to give revenue and employ- 
ment to the greatest number of people of his own country. 

Secondly, every individual who employs his capital in the sup- 
port of domestic industry, necessarily endeavours so to direct that 

® Above, pp. 349-353- 


Ed I reads “the” here 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4-’3 

industry, that its produce may be of the greatest possible value. 

The produce of industry is what it adds to the subject or mater- 
ials upon which it is employed. In proportion as the value of this 
produce is great or small, so will likewise be the profits of the em- 
ployer. But it is only for the sake of profit that any man employs 
a capital in the support of industry; and he will always, therefore, 
endeavour to employ it in the support of that industry of which 
the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, or to exchange for 
the greatest quantity either of money or of other goods. 

But the annual revenue of every society is always precisely 
equal to the exchangeable value of the whole annual produce of its 
industry, or rather is precisely the same thing with that exchange- 
able value. As every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as 
he can both to employ his capital in the support of domestic indus- 
try, and so to direct that industry that its produce may be of the 
greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render the 
annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally, in- 
deed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows 
how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of dom- 
estic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own security; 
and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce 
may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain, and he 
is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand to pro- 
mote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it always 
the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his 
own interest he frequently promotes that of the society more 
effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have never 
known much good done by those who affected to trade for the pub- 
lic good. It is an affectation, indeed, not very common among mer- 
chants, and very few words need be employed in dissuading them 
from it. 

What is the species of domestic industry which his capital can 
employ, and of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest 
value, every individual, it is evident, can, in his local situation, 
judge much better than any statesman or lawgiver can do for 
him. The statesman, who should attempt to direct private people 
in what manner they ought to employ their capitals, would not 
only load himself with a most unnecessary attention, but assume 
an authority which could safely be trusted, not only to no single 
person, but to no council or senate whatever, and which would no- 
where be so dangerous as in the hands of a man who had folly and 
presumption enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it. 

To give the monopoly of the home-market to the produce of 


voursto 
produce 
the great- 
est pos- 
sible 
value. 


He can 
judge of 
this much 
better 
than the 
states- 
man. 



High 

duties and 
prohibi- 
tions di- 
rect 

people to 
employ 
capital in 
producing 
at home 
what they 
could buy 
cheaper 
from 
abroad. 


It is as 
foolish 
fora 
nation 
as for an 
individual 
to make 
what can 
be bought 
cheaper. 


424 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

domestic industry, in any particular art or manufacture, is in some 
measure to direct private people in what manner they ought to em- 
ploy their capitals, and must, in almost all cases, be either a use- 
less or a hurtful regulation. If the produce of domestic can be 
brought there as cheap as that of foreign industry, the regulation 
is evidently useless. If it cannot, it must generally be hurtful. It is 
the maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to attempt 
to make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy. 
The taylor does not attempt to make his own shoes, but buys them 
of the shoemaker. The shoemaker does not attempt to make his 
own clothes, but employs a taylor. The farmer attempts to make 
neither the one nor the other, but employs those different arti- 
ficers. All of them find it for their interest to employ their whole 
industry in a w’ay in which they have some advantage over their 
neighbours, and to purchase with a part of its produce, or what 
is the same thing, with the price of a part of it, whatever else they 
have occasion for. 

What is prudence in the conduct of every private family, can 
scarce be folly in that of a great kingdom. If a foreign country can 
supply us with a commodity cheaper than we ourselves can make 
it, better buy it of them with some part of the produce of our own 
industry, employed in a way in which we have some advantage. 
The general industry of the country, being always in proportion to 
the capital which employs it, will not thereby be diminished, no 
more than that of the above-mentioned artificers; but only left to 
find out the way in which it can be employed with the greatest ad- 
vantage. It is certainly not employed to the greatest advantage, 
when it is thus directed towards an object which it can buy 
cheaper than it can make. The value of its annual produce is cer- 
tainly more or less diminished, when it is thus turned away from 
producing commodities evidently of more value than the com- 
modity which it is directed to produce. According to the supposi- 
tion, that commodity could be purchased from foreign countries 
cheaper than it can be made at home. It could, therefore, have been 
purchased with a part only of the commodities, or, what is the same 
thing, with a part only of the price of the commodities, which the 
industry employed by an equal capital would have produced at 
home, had it been left to follow its natural course. The industry of 
the country, therefore, is thus turned away from a more, to a less 
advantageous employment, and the exchangeable value of its an- 
nual produce, instead of being increased, according to the intention 
of the lawgiver, must necessarily be diminished by every such regu- 
lation. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4^5 

By means of such regulations, indeed, a particular manufacture 
may sometimes be acquired sooner than it could have been other- 
wise, and after a certain time may be made at home as cheap or 
cheaper than in the foreign country. But though the industry of the 
society may be thus carried with advantage into a particular chan- 
nel sooner than it could have been otherwise, it will by no means 
follow that the sum total, either of its industry, or of its revenue, 
can ever be augmented by any such regulation. The industry of the 
society can augment only in proportion as its capital augments, and 
its capital can augment only in proportion to what can be gradu- 
ally saved out of its revenue. But the immediate effect of every such 
regulation is to diminish its revenue, and what diminishes its rev- 
enue is certainly not very likely to augment its capital faster than it 
would have augmented of its own accord, had both capital and in- 
dustry been left to find out their natural employments. 

Though for want of such regulations the society should never ac- 
quire the proposed manufacture, it would not, upon that account, 
necessarily be the poorer in any one period of its duration. In every 
period of its duration its whole capitd and industry might still have 
been employed, though upon different objects, in the manner that 
was most advantageous at the time. In every period its revenue 
might have been the greatest which its capital could afford, and 
both capital and revenue might have been augmented with the 
greatest possible rapidity. 

The natural advantages which one country has over another in 
producing particular commodities are sometimes so great, that it is 
acknowledged by all the world to be in vain to struggle with them. 
By means of glasses, hotbeds, and hotwalls, very good grapes can 
be raised in Scotland, and very good wine too can be made of them 
at about thirty times the expence for which at least equally good 
can be brought from foreign countries. Would it be a reasonable 
law to prohibit the importation of all foreign wines, merely to en- 
courage the making of claret and burgundy in Scotland? But if 
there would be a manifest absurdity in turning towards any em- 
ployment, thirty times more of the capital and industry of the 
country, than would be necessary to purchase from foreign coun- 
tries an equal quantity of the commodities wanted, th.ere must be 
an absurdity, though not altogether so glaring, yet exactly of the 
same kind, in turning towards any such employment a thirtieth, or 
even a three hundredth part more of either. Whether the advan- 
tages which one country has over another, be natural or acquired, 
is in this respect of no consequence. As long as the one country has 

“ Ed. I reads “augmenting,” which seems more correct. 


Some- 
times by 
such regu- 
lations a 
manufac- 
ture may 
be estab- 
lished 
earlier 
than it 
would 
otherwise 
have been 
but this 
would 
make 
capital 
accumu- 
late slow- 
er, 

and the 
country 
might al- 
ways be 
just as 
rich if it 
never ac- 
quired the 
manufac- 
ture. 


No one 
proposes 
that a 
country 
should 
strive 
against 
great 
natural 
advan- 
tages, but 
it is also 
absurd to 
strive 
against 
smaller 
advan- 
tages 
whether 
natural or 
acquired. 



Mer- 

chants 

and 

manufac- 
turers get 
the most 
benefit 
from high 
duties and 
prohibi- 
tions. 


The free 
importa- 
tion of 
foreign 
cattle 
would 
make no 
great dif- 
ference to 
British 
graziers 


426 the wealth of nations 

those advantages, and the other wants them, it will always be more 
advantageous for the latter, rather to buy of the former than to 
make. It is an acquired advantage only, which one artificer has 
over his neighbour, who exercises another trade; and yet they both 
find it more advantageous to buy of one another, than to make 
what does not belong to their particular trades. 

Merchants and manufacturers are the people who derive the 
greatest advantage from this monopoly of the home-market. The 
prohibition of the importation of foreign cattle, and of salt provi- 
sions, together with the high duties upon foreign corn, which in 
times of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition,^- are not near 
so advantageous to the graziers and farmers of Great Britain, as 
other regulations of the same kind are to its merchants and manu- 
facturers. Manufactures, those of the finer kind especially, are 
more easily transported from one country to another than corn or 
cattle. It is in the fetching and carrying manufactures, accord- 
ingly, that foreign trade is chiefly employed. In manufactures, a 
very small advantage will enable foreigners to undersell our own 
workmen, even in the home market. It will require a very great one 
to enable them to do so in the rude produce of the soil. If the free 
importation of foreign manufactures were^® permitted, several of 
the home manufactures would probably suffer, and some of them, 
perhaps, go to ruin altogether, and a considerable part of the stock 
and industry at present employed in them, would be forced to 
find out some other employment. But the freest importation of the 
rude produce of the soil could have no such effect upon the agri- 
culture of the country. 

If the importation of foreign cattle, for example, were made ever 
so free, so few could be imported, that the grazing trade of Great 
Britain could be little affected by it. Live cattle are, perhaps, the 
only commodity of which the transportation is more expensive by 
sea than by land. By land they carry themselves to market. By 
sea, not only the cattle, but their food and their water too, must be 
carried at no small expence and inconveniency. The short sea be- 
tween Ireland and Great Britain, indeed, renders the importation 
of Irish cattle more easy. But though the free importation of them, 
which was lately permitted only for a limited time, were rendered 
perpetual, it could have no considerable effect upon the interest of 
the graziers of Great Britain. Those parts of Great Britain which 
border upon the Irish sea are all grazing countries. Irish cattle 
could never be imported for their use, but must be drove through 


“ Above, p. 420, and below, pp. 502, 503. 

“ Eds. 1-3 read “was” here and six lines lower down 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4^7 

those very extensive countries, at no small expence and inconven- 
iency, before they could arrive at their proper market. Fat cattle 
could not be drove so far. Lean cattle, therefore, only could be im- 
ported, and such importation could interfere, not with the interest 
of the feeding or fattening countries, to which, by reducing the 
price of lean cattle, it would rather be advantageous, but with that 
of the breeding countries only. The small number of Irish cattle 
imported since their importation was permitted, together with the 
good price at which lean cattle still continue to sell, seem to dem- 
onstrate that even the breeding countries of Great Britain are 
never likely to be much affected by the free importation of Irish 
cattle. The common people of Ireland, indeed, are said to have 
sometimes opposed with violence the exportation of their cattle. 

But if the exporters had found any great advantage in continuing 
the trade, they could easily, when the law was on their side, have 
conquered this mobbish opposition. 

Feeding and fattening countries, besides, must always be highly It might 
improved, whereas breeding countries are generally uncultivated, 

The high price of lean cattle, by augmenting the value of unculti- the culti- 
vated land, is like a bounty against improvement. To any country vated 
which was highly improved throughout, it would be more advan- 
tageous to import its lean cattle than to breed them. The province penseof 
of Holland, accordingly, is said to follow this maxim at present, therug- 
The mountains of Scotland, Wales and Northumberland, indeed, 
are countries not capable of much improvement, and seem destined tainous 
by nature to be the breeding countries of Great Britain. The freest districts, 
importation of foreign cattle could have no other effect than to 
hinder those breeding countries from takmg advantage of the in- 
creasing population and improvement of the rest of the kingdom, 
from raising their price to an exorbitant height, and from laying 
a real tax upon all the more improved and cultivated parts of the 
country. 

The freest importation of salt provisions, in the same manner, The free 
could have as little effect upon the interest of the graziers of Great 
Britain as that of live cattle. Salt provisions are not only a very saltpio- 
bulky commodity, but when compared with fresh meat, they are visions 
a commodity both of worse quality, and as they cost more labour 
and expence, of higher price. They could never, therefore, come make 
into competition with the fresh meat, though they might with the 
salt provisions of the country. They might be used for victualling ^he 
ships for distant voyages, and such like uses, but could never make graziers, 
any considerable part of the food of the people. The small quan- 
tity of salt provisions imported from Ireland since their importa- 



and even 
the free 
importa- 
tion of 
corn 

would not 
much af- 
fect the 
farmers. 


Country 
gentlemen 
and farm- 
ers are 
less sub- 
ject to 
the spirit 
of mon- 
opoly 
than mer- 


428 the wealth of nations 

tion was rendered free, is an experimental proof that our graziers 
have nothing to apprehend from it. It does not appear that the 
price of butcher's-meat has ever been sensibly affected by it. 

Even the free importation of foreign corn could very little affect 
the interest of the farmers of Great Britain. Corn is a much more 
bulky commodity than butcher’s-meat. A pound of wheat at a 
penny is as dear as a pound of butcher’s-meat at fourpence. The 
small quantity of foreign corn imported even in times of the great- 
est scarcity, may satisfy our farmers that they can have nothing to 
fear from the freest importation. The average quantity imported 
one year with another, amounts only, according to the very well 
informed author of the tracts upon the corn trade, to twenty-three 
thousand seven hundred and twenty-eight quarters of all sorts of 
grain, and does not exceed the five hundredth and seventy-one 
part of the annual consumption.^^ But as the bounty upon corn 
occasions a greater exportation in years of plenty, so it must of 
consequence occasion a greater importation in years of scarcity, 
than in the actual state of tillage^^ would otherwise take place. By 
means of it, the plenty of one year does not compensate the scar- 
city of another, and as the average quantity exported is necessarily 
augmented by it, so must likewise, in the actual state of tillage, the 
average quantity imported. If there were no bounty, as less corn 
would be exported, so it is probable that, one year with another, 
less would be imported than at present. The corn merchants, the 
fetchers and carriers of corn between Great Britain and foreign 
countries, would have much less employment, and might suffer 
considerably; but the country gentlemen and farmers could suffer 
very little. It is in the corn merchants accordingly, rather than in 
the country gentlemen and farmers, that I have observed the 
greatest anxiety for the renewal and continuation of the bounty. 

Country gentlemen and farmers are, to their great honour, of 
all people, the least subject to the wretched spirit of monopoly. 
The undertaker of a great manufactory is sometimes alarmed if 
another work of the same kind is established within twenty miles 
of him. The Dutch undertaker of the woollen manufacture at 
Abbeville^’^ stipulated, that no work of the same kind should be es- 
tablished within thirty leagues of that city. Farmers and country 

^‘Charles Smith, Three Tracts on the Corn-Trade and Corn-Laws^ pp. 144- 
145. The same figure is quoted below, p. 501. 

“ Ed. I does not contain the words “in the actual state of tillage.” 

Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 

Joseph Van Robais in 1669.— John Smith, Memoirs of Wool, vol. ii., pp. 
426, 427, but neither John Smith nor Charles King, British Merchant, 1721, 
vol. ii., pp. 93, 94, gives the particular stipulation mentioned. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 429 

gentlemen, on the contrary, are generally disposed rather to pro- 
mote than to obstruct the cultivation and improvement of their 
neighbours farms and estates. They have no secrets, such as those 
of the greater part of manufacturers, but are generally rather fond 
of communicating to their neighbours, and of extending as far as 
possible any new practice which they have found to be advanta- 
geous. Pius QuestuSj says old Cato, stabilissimusquej mmimeque 
invidiosusj minimeque male cogitantes sunt, qui in eo studio oc~ 
cupati sunt}^ Country gentlemen and farmers, dispersed in differ- 
ent parts of the country, cannot so easily combine as merchants 
and manufacturers, who being collected into towns, and accus- 
tomed to that exclusive corporation spirit which prevails in them, 
naturally endeavour to obtain against all their countr5mien, the 
same exclusive privilege which they generally possess against the 
inhabitants of their respective towns. They accordingly seem to 
have been the original inventors of those restraints upon the im- 
portation of foreign goods, which secure to them the monopoly of 
the home-market. It was probably in imitation of them, and to put 
themselves upon a level with those who, they found, were disposed 
to oppress them, that the country gentlemen and farmers of Great 
Britain so far forgot the generosity which is natural to their sta- 
tion, as to demand the exclusive privilege of supplying their 
countrymen with corn and butcher’s-meat. They did not perhaps 
take time to consider, how much less their interest could be af- 
fected by the freedom of trade, than that of the people whose ex- 
ample they followed. 

To prohibit by a perpetual law the importation of foreign com 
and cattle, is in reality to enact, that the population and industry 
of the country shall at no time exceed what the rude produce of 
its own soil can maintain. 

There seem, however, to be two cases in which it will generally 
be advantageous to lay some burden upon foreign, for the encour- 
agement of domestic industry. 

The first is, when some particular sort of industry is necessary 
for the defence of the country. The defence of Great Britain, for 
example, depends very much upon the number of its sailors and 
shipping. The act of navigation,^® therefore, very properly endeav- 
ours to give the sailors and shipping of Great Britain the mo- 
nopoly of the trade of their own country, in some cases, by absolute 
prohibitions, and in others by heavy burdens upon the shipping 

Cato, De re rustica, ad irdt., but “Questu^^ should of course be “qu<Bsius!* 

^*^12 Car. II., c. i8, “An act for the encouraging and increasing of shipping 
and navigation.’’ 


chants 

and 

manufac- 

turers. 


The pro- 
hibition 
of foreign 
com and 
cattle re- 
strains the 
popula- 
tion. 


There are 
two cases 
which are 
excep- 
tional, 

(i) when 
a particu- 
lar indus- 
try is nec- 



essary 
for the 
defence 
of the 
country, 
like 

shipping, 
which is 
properly 
encour- 
aged by 
the act of 
naviga- 
tion, 


430 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

of foreign countries. The following are the principal dispositions 

of this act. 

First, all ships, of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths 
of the mariners are not British subjects, are prohibited, upon pain 
of forfeiting ship and cargo, from trading to the British settle- 
ments and plantations, or from being employed in the coasting 
trade of Great Britain.^^ 

Secondly, a great variety of the most bulky articles of importa- 
tion can be brought into Great Britain only, either in such ships as 
are above described, or in ships of the country where those goods 
are produced, and of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths 
of the mariners, are of that particular country; and when imported 
even in ships of this latter kind, they are subject to double aliens 
duty. If imported in ships of any other country, the penalty is for- 
feiture of ship and goods.^^ When this act was made, the Dutch 
were, what they still are, the great carriers of Europe, and by this 
regulation they were entirely excluded from being the carriers to 
Great Britain, or from importing to us the goods of any other Eu- 
ropean country. 

Thirdly, a great variety of the most bulky articles of importation 
are prohibited from being imported, even in British ships, from any 
country but that in which they are produced; under pain of for- 
feiting ship and cargo.-^ This regulation too was probably intended 
against the Dutch. Holland was then, as now, the great emporium 
for all European goods, and by this regulation, British ships were 
hindered from loading in Holland the goods of any other European 
country. 

Fourthly, salt fish of all kinds, whale-fins, whale-bone, oil, and 
blubber, not caught by and cured on board British vessels, when 
imported into Great Britain, are subjected to double aliens duty.^^ 
The Dutch, as they are still the principal, were then the only fishers 
in Europe that attempted to supply foreign nations with fish. By 
this regulation, a very heavy burden was laid upon their supplying 
Great Britain. 

When the act of navigation was made, though England and Hob 

® §§ I and 6. 

8 and 9. Eds. i and 2 read “ship and cargo.” The alteration was prob- 
ably made in order to avoid wearisome repetition of the same phrase in the 
three paragraphs. 

^ § 4, which, however, applies to all such goods of foreign growth and man- 
ufacture as were forbidden to b& imported except in English ships, not only to 
bulky goods. The words “great Variety of the most bulky articles of impor- 
tation” occur at the beginning ^ the previous paragraph, and are perhaps 
copied here by mistake. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 43i 

land were not actually at war, the most violent animosity subsisted 
between the two nations. It had begun during the government of 
the long parliament, which first framed this act,-^ and it broke out 
soon after in the Dutch wars during that of the Protector and of 
Charles the Second. It is not impossible, therefore, that some of the 
regulations of this famous act may have proceeded from national 
animosity. They are as wise, however, as if they had all been dic- 
tated by the most deliberate wisdom. National animosity at that 
particular time aimed at the very same object which the most delib- 
erate wisdom would have recommended, the diminution of the na- 
val power of Holland, the only naval power which could endanger 
the security of England. 

The act of navigation is not favourable to foreign commerce, or 
to the growth of that opulence which can arise from it. The interest 
of a nation in its commercial relations to foreign nations is, like 
that of a merchant with regard to the different people with whom 
he deals, to buy as cheap and to sell as dear as possible. But it will 
be most likely to buy cheap, when by the most perfect freedom of 
trade it encourages all nations to bring to it the goods which it has 
occasion to purchase; and, for the same reason, it will be most like- 
ly to sell dear, when its markets are thus filled with the greatest 
number of buyers. The act of navigation, it is true, lays no burden 
upon foreign ships that come to export the produce of British in- 
dustry. Even the ancient aliens duty, which used to be paid upon 
all goods exported as well as imported, has, by several subsequent 
acts, been t^en off from the greater part of the articles of exporta- 
tion.^^ But if foreigners, either by prohibitions or high duties, are 
hindered from coming to sell, they cannot always afford to come to 
buy; because coming without a cargo, they must lose the freight 
from their own country to Great Britain. By diminishing the num- 
ber of sellers, therefore, we necessarily diminish that of buyers, and 
are thus likely not only to buy foreign goods dearer, but to sell our 
own cheaper, than if there was a more perfect freedom of trade. As 
defence, however, is of much more importance than opulence, the 
act of navigation is, perhaps, the wisest of all the commercial regu- 
lations of England. 

The second case, in which it will generally be advantageous to 
lay some burden upon foreign for the encouragement of domestic 
industry, is, when some tax is imposed at home upon the produce 

“ In 1651, by “An act for the increase of shipping and encouragement of the 
navigation of this nation,” p. 1,449 in the collection of Commonwealth Acts. 

“ By 25 Car. II., c. 6, § i, except on coal. The plural “acts” may refer to 
renewing acts. Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1672. 


a wise act, 
though 
dictated 
by ani- 
mosity, 


and un- 
favour- 
able to 
foreign 
com- 
merce; 


and (2) 
when 
there is a 
tax on the 



produce 
of the like 
home 
manufac- 
ture. 


Some 
people say 
that this 
principle 
justifies a 
general 
imposi- 
tion of 
duties on 
imports 
to coun- 
terbalance 
taxes 
levied at 
home on 
neces- 
saries, 


but there 
is a dif- 
ference, 


432 the wealth of nations 

of the latter. In this case, it seems reasonable that an equal tax 
should be imposed upon the like produce of the former. This would 
not give the monopoly of the home market to domestic industry, 
nor turn towards a particular employment a greater share of the 
stock and labour of the country, than what would naturally go to 
it. It would only hinder any part of what would naturally go to it 
from being turned away by the tax, into a less natural direction, 
and would leave the competition between foreign and domestic in- 
dustry, after the tax, as nearly as possible upon the same footing as 
before it. In Great Britain, when any such tax is laid upon the 
produce of domestic industry, it is usual at the same time, in order 
to stop the clamorous complaints of our merchants and manufac- 
turers, that they will be undersold at home, to lay a much heavier 
duty upon the importation of all foreign goods of the same kind. 

This second limitation of the freedom of trade according to some 
people should, upon some occasions, be extended much farther than 
to the precise foreign commodities which could come into competi- 
tion with those which had been taxed at home. When the neces- 
saries of life have been taxed in any country, it becomes proper, 
they pretend, to tax not only the like necessaries of life imported 
from other countries, but all sorts of foreign goods which can come ' 
into competition with any thing that is the produce of domestic in- 
dustry. Subsistence, they say, becomes necessarily dearer in con- 
sequence of such taxes; and the price of labour must always rise 
with the price of the labourers subsistence. Every commodity, 
therefore, which is the produce of domestic industry, though not 
immediately taxed itself, becomes dearer in consequence of such 
taxes, because the labour which produces it becomes so. Such taxes, 
therefore, are really equivalent, they say, to a tax upon every par- 
ticular commodity produced at home. In order to put domestic 
upon the same footing with foreign industry, therefore, it becomes 
necessary, they think, to lay some duty upon every foreign com- 
modity, equal to this enhancement of the price of the home com- 
modities with which it can come into competition. 

Whether taxes upon the necessaries of life, such as those i|i Great 
Britain upon^® soap, salt, leather, candles, &c. necessarily raise the 
price of labour, and consequently that of all other commodities, I 
shall consider hereafter,^^ when I come to treat of taxes. Sup- 
posing, however, in the mean time, that they have this effect, and 
they have it undoubtedly, this general enhancement of the price 
of all commodities, in consequence of that of labour, is a case which 

® Ed I contains the words “malt, beer” here. 

^ Below, pp 821-826 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 433 

differs in the two following respects from that of a particular com- 
modity, of which the price was enhanced by a particular tax im- 
mediately imposed upon it. 

First, it might always be known with great exactness how far the 
price of such a commodity could be enhanced by such a tax: but 
how far the general enhancement of the price of labour might affect 
that of every different commodity about which labour was em- 
ployed, could never be known with any tolerable exactness. It 
would be impossible, therefore, to proportion with any tolerable 
exactness the tax upon every foreign, to this enhancement of the 
price of every home commodity. 

Secondly, taxes upon the necessaries of life have nearly the same 
effect upon the circumstances of the people as a poor soil and a bad 
climate. Provisions are thereby rendered dearer in the same manner 
as if it required extraordinary labour and expence to raise them. As 
in the natural scarcity arising from soil and climate, it would be 
absurd to direct the people in what manner they ought to employ 
their capitals and industry, so is it^^ likewise in the artificial scar- 
city arising from such taxes. To be left to accommodate, as well as 
they could, their industry to their situation, and to find out those 
employments m which, notwithstanding their unfavourable circum- 
stances, they might have some advantage either in the home or in 
the foreign market, is what in both cases would evidently be most 
for their advantage. To lay a new tax upon them, because they are 
already overburdened with taxes, and because they already pay too 
dear for the necessaries of life, to make them likewise pay too dear 
for the greater part of other commodities, is certainly a most absurd 
way of making amends. 

Such taxes, when they have grown up to a certain height, are a 
curse equal to the barrenness of the eardi and the inclemency of the 
heavens; and yet it is in the richest and most industrious countries 
that they have been most generally imposed. No other countries 
could support so great a disorder. As the strongest bodies only can 
live and enjoy health, under an unwholesome regimen; so the na- 
tions only, that in every sort of industry have the greatest natural 
and acquired advantages, can subsist and prosper under such taxes. 
Holland is the country in Europe in whidi they abound most, and 
which from peculiar circumstances continues to prosper, not by 
means of them, as has been most absurdly supposed, but in spite of 
them. 

As there are two cases in which it will generally be advantageous 
to lay some burden upon foreign, for the encouragement of domes- 

^ Ed. 1 reads “it is.” 


since (a) 
the effect 
of taxes 
on neces- 
saries 
cannot be 
exactly 
known, 


and (b) 
taxes on 
neces- 
saries are 
like poor 
soil or bad 
climate: 
they can- 
not justi- 
fy an at- 
tempt to 
give capi- 
tal an un- 
natural 
direction 


Taxes on 
neces- 
saries are 
common- 
est in the 
richest 
countries 
because 
no others 
could sup- 
port them. 


There are 
two other 



434 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

possible tic industry; so there are two others in which it may sometimes be 

to a matter of deliberation; in the one, how far it is proper to continue 

general the free importation of certain foreign goods; and in the other, how 
principle: far, or in what manner, it may be proper to restore that free im- 

portation after it has been for some time interrupted* 

(i) Re- The case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation 
taxation how far it is proper to continue the free importation of certain for- 
eign goods, is, when some foreign nation restrains by high duties or 
prohibitions the importation of some of our manufactures into their 
country. Revenge in this case naturally dictates retaliation, and 
that we should impose the like duties and prohibitions upon the 
importation of some or all of their manufactures into ours. Nations 
accordingly seldom fail to retaliate in this manner. The French 
have been particularly forward to favour their own manufactures 
by restraining the importation of such foreign goods as could come 
into competition with them. In this consisted a great part of the 
policy of Mr. Colbert, who, notwithstanding his great abilities, 
seems in this case to have been imposed upon by the sophistry of 
merchants and manufacturers, who are always demanding a mo- 
nopoly against their countrymen. It is at present the opinion of the 
most intelligent men in France that his operations of this kind 
have not been beneficial to his country. That minister, by the tariff 
of 1667, imposed very high duties upon a great number of foreign 
manufactures. Upon his refusing to moderate them in favour of the 
Dutch, they in 1671 prohibited the importation of the wines, 
brandies and manufactures of France. Thfe w'ar of 1672 seems to 
have been in part occasioned by this commercial dispute. The 
peace of Nimeguen put an end to it in 1678, by moderating some 
of those duties in favour of the Dutch, who in consequence took off 
their prohibition. It was about the same time that the French and 
English began mutually to oppress each other’s industry, by the 
like duties and prohibitions, of which the French, however, seem to 
have set the first example. The spirit of hostility which has sub- 
sisted between the two nations ever since, has hitherto hindered 
them from being moderated on either side. In 1697 the English pro- 
hibited the importation of bonelace, the manufacture of Flanders. 
The government of that country, at that time under the dominion 
of Spain, prohibited in return the importation of English woollens. 
In 1700, the prohibition of importing bonelace into England, was 
taken off upon condition that the importation of English woollens 
into Flanders should be put on the same footing as before.^^ 

®®The importation of bone lace was prohibited by 13 and 14 Car. II , c. 13, 
and 9, and 10 W. Ill, c. 9, was passed to make the prohibition more eifectual. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 435 

There may be good policy in retaliations of this kind, when there 
is a probability that they will procure the repeal of the high duties 
or prohibitions complained of. The recovery of a great foreign mar- 
ket will generally more than compensate the transitory inconven- 
iency of paying dearer during a short time for some sorts of goods. 
To judge whether such retaliations are likely to produce such an ef- 
fect, does not, perhaps, belong so much to the science of a legisla- 
tor, whose deliberations ought to be governed by general principles 
which are always the same, as to the skill of that insidious and 
crafty animal, vulgarly called a statesman or politician, whose 
councils are directed by the momentary fluctuations of affairs. 
When there is no probability that any such repeal can be procured, 
it seems a bad method of compensating the injury done to certain 
classes of our people, to do another injury ourselves, not only to 
those classes, but to almost all the other classes of them. When 
our neighbours prohibit some manufacture of ours, we generally 
prohibit, not only the same, for that alone would seldom affect them 
considerably, but some other manufacture of theirs. This may no 
doubt give encouragement to some particular class of workmen 
among ourselves, and by excluding some of their rivals, may enable 
them to raise their price in the home-market. Those workmen, how- 
ever, who suffered by our neighbours’ prohibition will not be bene- 
fited by ours. On the contrary, they and almost all the other classes 
of our citizens will thereby be obliged to pay dearer than before 
for certain goods. Every such law, therefore, imposes a real tax up- 
on the whole country, not in favour of that particular class of work- 
men who were injured by our neighbours’ prohibition, but of some 
other class. 

The case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation, 
how far, or in what manner, it is proper to restore the free importa- 
tion of foreign goods, after it has been for some time interrupted, 
is, when particular manufactures, by means of high duties or pro- 
hibitions upon all foreign goods which can come into competition 
with them, have been so far extended as to employ a great multi- 
tude of hands. Humanity may in this case require that the freedom 
of trade should be restored only by slow gradations, and with a 
good deal of reserve and circumspection. Were those high duties 
and prohibitions taken away all at once, cheaper foreign goods of 
the same kind might be poured so fast into the home market, as to 
deprive all at once many thousands of our people of their ordinary 

By II and 12 W. III., c. ii, it was provided that the prohibition should cease 
three months after English woollen manufactures were readmitted to Flanders. 

^ Ed. I reads ‘injury ourselves, both to those classes and to.” 


maybe 
good 
policy 
where it 
is likely 
to secure 
the aboli- 
tion of 
foreign 
restraints. 


(2) It 

may be 
desirable 
to intro- 
duce free- 
dom of 
trade by 
slow 
grada- 
tions. 


But the 
disorder 



occa- 
sioned by 
its sudden 
introduc- 
tion 

would be 
less than 
is sup- 
posed 
since 

(a) no 
manufac- 
ture 
which is 
now ex- 
ported 
would be 
affected; 


ih) the 
people 
thrown 
out of 
one em- 
ployment 
would 
easily 
hnd 

another, 


436 the wealth of nations 

employment and means of subsistence. The disorder which this 
would occasion might no doubt be very considerable. It would in 
all probability, however, be much less than is commonly imagined, 
for the two following reasons: 

First, all those manufactures, of which any part is commonly 
exported to other European countries without a bounty, could be 
very little affected by the freest importation of foreign goods. Such 
manufactures must be sold as cheap abroad as any other foreign 
goods of the same quality and kind, and consequently must be sold 
cheaper at home. They would still, therefore, keep possession of the 
home market, and though a capricious man of fashion might some- 
times prefer foreign wares, merely because they were foreign, to 
cheaper and better goods of the same kind that were made at home, 
this folly could, from the nature of things, extend to so few, that it 
could make no sensible impression upon the general employment of 
the people. But a great part of all the different branches of our 
woollen manufacture, of our tanned leather, and of our hard-ware, 
are annually exported to other European countries without any 
bounty, and these are the manufactures which employ the greatest 
number of hands. The silk, perhaps, is the manufacture which 
would suffer the most by this freedom of trade, and after it the 
linen, though the latter much less than the former. 

Secondly, though a great number of people should, by thus re- 
storing the freedom of trade, be thrown all at once out of their or- 
dinary employment and common method of subsistence, it would 
by no means follow that they would thereby be deprived either of 
employment or subsistence. By the reduction of the army and navy 
at the end of the late war, more than a hundred thousand soldiers 
and seamen, a number equal to what is employed in the greatest 
manufactures, were all at once thrown out of their ordinary em- 
ployment; but, though they no doubt suffered some inconveniency, 
they were not thereby deprived of all employment' and subsistence. 
The greater part of the seamen, it is probable, gradually betook 
themselves to the merchant-service as they could find occasion, and 
in the meantime both they and the soldiers were absorbed in the 
great mass of the people, and employed in a great variety of occu- 
pations. Not only no great convulsion, but no sensible disorder 
arose from so great a change in the situation of more than a hun- 
dred thousand men, all accustomed to the use of arms, and many of 
them to rapine and plunder. The number of vagrants was scarce 
any-where sensibly increased by it, even the wages of labour were 
not reduced by it in any occupation, so far as I have been able to 
learn, except in that of seamen in the merchant-service. But if we 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 437 

compare together the habits of a soldier and of any sort of manu- 
facturer, we shall find that those of the latter do not tend so much 
to disqualify him from being employed in a new trade, as those of 
the former from being employed in any. The manufacturer has al- 
ways been accustomed to look for his subsistence from his labour 
only: the soldier to expect it from his pay. Application and indus- 
try have been familiar to the one; idleness and dissipation to the 
other. But it is surely much easier to change the direction of indus- 
try from one sort of labour to another, than to turn idleness and 
dissipation to any. To the greater part of manufactures besides, it 
has already been observed, there are other collateral manufac- 
tures of so similar a nature, that a workman can easily transfer his 
industry from one of them to another. The greater part of such 
workmen too are occasionally employed in country labour. The 
stock which employed them in a particular manufacture before, will 
still remain in the country to employ an equal number of people in 
some other way. The capital of the country remaining Ihe same, 
the demand for labour will likewise be the same, or very nearly the 
same, though it may be exerted in different places and for different 
occupations. Soldiers and seamen, indeed, when discharged from 
the king^s service, are at liberty to exercise any trade, within any 
town or place of Great Britain or Ireland. Let the same natural 
liberty of exercising what species of industry they please, be re- 
stored to all his majesty^s subjects, in the same manner as to sol- 
diers and seamen; that is, break down the exclusive privileges of 
corporations, and repeal the statute of apprenticeship, both which 
are real encroachments upon natural liberty, and add to these the 
repeal of the law of settlements, so that a poor workman, when 
thrown out of employment either in one trade or in one place, may 
seek for it in another trade or in another place, without the fear 
either of a prosecution or of a removal, and neither the public nor 
the individuals will suffer much more from the occasional disband- 
ing some particular classes of manufacturers, than from that of sol- 
diers. Our manufacturers have no doubt great merit with their 
country, but they cannot have more than those who defend it with 
their blood, nor deserve to be treated with more delicacy. 

To expect, indeed, that the freedom of trade should ever be en- 
tirely restored in Great Britain, is as absurd as to expect that an 
Oceana or Utopia^^ should ever be established in it. Not only the 

^ Above, p. 134, i3S- 

12 Car. n., c. 16; 12 Ann., st. i, § 13; 3 Geo. Ill, c. 8, gave this liberty 
after particular wars. 

“ Ed. I reads “Utopea.” 


especially 
if the 
privileges 
of corpo- 
rations 
and the 
law of 
settle- 
ment were 
abolished. 


Private 
interests 
are too 
strong to 



allow of 
the resto- 
ration of 
freedom 
of trade 
in Great 
Britain. 


The fact 
that 

equitable 
regard is 
due to the 
manufac- 
turer who 
has fixed 
capital in 
his busi- 
ness is an 
argument 
against 
the estab- 
lishment 
of new 
monopo- 
lies. 


43S the wealth of nations 

prejudices of the public, but what is much more unconquerable, 
the private interests of many individuals, irresistibly oppose it. 
Were the officers of the army to oppose with the same zeal and un- 
animity any reduction in the number of forces, with which master 
manufacturers set themselves against every law that is likely to 
increase the number of their rivals in the home market; were the 
former to animate their soldiers, in the same manner as the latter 
enflame their workmen, to attack with violence and outrage the 
proposers of any such regulation; to attempt to reduce the army 
would be as dangerous as it has now become to attempt to dimin- 
ish in any respect the monopoly which our manufacturers have ob- 
tained against us. This monopoly has so much increased the num- 
ber of some particular tribes of them, that, like an overgrown 
standing army, they have become formidable to the government, 
and upon many occasions intimidate the legislature. The member 
of parliament who supports every proposal for strengthening this 
monopoly, is sure to acquire not only the reputation of understand- 
ing trade, but great popularity and influence with an order of men 
whose numbers and wealth render them of great importance. If he 
opposes them, on the contrary, and still more if he has authority 
enough to be able to thwart them, neither the most acknowledged 
probity, nor the highest rank, nor the greatest public services, can 
protect him from the most infamous abuse and detraction, from 
personal insults, nor sometimes from real danger, arising from the 
insolent outrage of furious and disappointed monopolists. 

The undertaker of a great manufacture, who, by the home mar- 
kets being suddenly laid open to the competition of foreigners, 
should be obliged to abandon his trade, would no doubt suffer very 
considerably. That part of his capital which had usually been em- 
ployed in purchasing materials and in paying his workmen, might, 
without much difficulty, perhaps, find another employment. But 
that part of it which was fixed in workhouses, and in the instru- 
ments of trade, could scarce be disposed of without considerable 
loss. The equitable regard, therefore, to his interest requires that 
changes of this kind should never be introduced suddenly, but slow- 
ly, gradually, and after a very long warning. The legislature, were 
it possible that its deliberations could be always directed, not by 
the clamorous importunity of partial interests, but by an extensive 
view of the general good, ought upon this very account, perhaps, to 
be particularly careful neither to establish any new monopolies of 
this kind, nor to extend further those which are already established. 
Every such regulation introduces some degree of real disorder into 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 439 

the constitution of the state, which it will be difficult afterwards to 
cure without occasioning another disorder. 

How far it may be proper to impose taxes upon the importation 
of foreign goods, in order, not to prevent their importation, but to 
raise a revenue for government, I shall consider hereafter when I 
come to treat of taxes.^^ Taxes imposed with a view to prevent, or 
even to diminish importation, are evidently as destructive of the 
revenue of the customs as of the freedom of trade. 

Below, pp. 845-850, 




Customs 
duties im- 
posed for 
revenue 
remain to 
be con- 
sidered 
hereafter. 



British 
restraints 
on im- 
ports 
from 
France 
are an 
example. 


« 


CHAPTER III 

OF THE EXTRAORDINARY RESTRAINTS UPON THE IMPORTATION OF 
GOODS OF ALMOST ALL KINDS, FROM THOSE COUNTRIES WITH 
WHICH THE BALANCE IS SUPPOSED TO BE DISADVANTAGEOUS 

Part I 

Of the Unreasonableness of those Restraints even upon the Prin- 
ciples of the Commercial System} 

To lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of goods of 
almost all kinds, from those particular countries with which the 
balance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous, is the second 
expedient by which the commercial system proposes to increase the 
quantity of gold and silver. Thus in Great Britain, Silesia lawns 
may be imported for home consumption, upon paying certain du- 
ties. But French cambrics and lawns are prohibited to be imported 
except into the port of London, there to be warehoused for exporta- 
tion.^ Higher duties are imposed upon the wines of France than 
upon those of Portugal, or indeed of any other country. By what is 
called the impost 1692,^ a duty of five and twenty per cent., of the 
rate or value, was laid upon all French goods; while the goods of 
other nations were, the greater part of them, subjected to much 
lighter duties, seldom exceeding five per cent. The wine, brandy, 
salt and vinegar of France were indeed excepted; these commodi- 
ties being subjected to other heavy duties, either by other laws, or 
by particular clauses of the same law. In 1696, a second duty of 
twenty-five per cent., the first not having been thought a sufficient 
discouragement, was imposed upon all French goods, except bran- 
dy; together with a new duty of five and twenty pounds upon the 
ton of French wine, and another of fifteen pounds upon the ton of 
French vinegar.^ French goods have never been omitted in any of 

^ Ed. I contains no part headings and does not divide the chapter into parts. 

^ 18 Geo. IL, c. 36; 7 Geo. III., c. 43. ® 4 W. and M., c. 5, § 2. 

* 7 and 8 W. III., c. 20 ; but<«dne and vinegar were excepted from the gen- 
eral increase of 25 per cent, as well as brandy, upon which the additional duty 
was £30 per ton of single proof and £60 per ton of double proof. 

440 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 44 i 

those general subsidies, or duties of five per cent, which have been 
imposed upon all, or the greater part of the goods enumerated in the 
book of rates. If we count the one third and two third subsidies as 
making a complete subsidy between them, there have been five of 
these general subsidies; ® so that before the commencement of the 
present war seventy-five per cent, may be considered as the lowest 
duty, to which the greater part of the goods of the growth, prod- 
uce, or manufacture of France were liable. But upon the greater 
part of goods, those duties are equivalent to a prohibition. The 
French in their turn have, I believe, treated our goods and manu- 
factures just as hardly; though I am not so well acquainted with 
the particular hardships which they have imposed upon them. 
Those mutual restraints have put an end to almost all fair com- 
merce between the two nations, and smugglers are now the princi- 
pal importers, either of British goods into France, or of French 
goods into Great Britain. The principles which I have been exam- 
ining in the foregoing chapter took their origin from private inter- 
est and the spirit of monopoly; those which I am going to examine 
in this, from national prejudice and animosity.® They are, accord- 
ingly, as might well be expected, still more unreasonable. They are 
so, even upon the principles of the commercial system. 

First, though it were certain that in the case of a free trade be- 
tween France and England, for example, the balance would be in 
favour of France, it would by no means follow that such a trade 
would be disadvantageous to England, or that the general balance 
of its whole trade would thereby be turned more against it. If the 
wines of France are better and cheaper than those of Portugal, or 
its linens than those of Germany, it would be more advantageous 
for Great Britain to purchase both the wine and the foreign linen 
which it had occasion for of France, than of Portugal and Germany. 
Though the value of the annual importations from France would 
thereby be greatly augmented, the value of the whole annual im- 
portations would be diminished, in proportion as the French goods 
of the same quality were cheaper than those of the other two coun- 
tries. This would be the case, even upon the supposition that the 


” See below, pp. 830, 831. 

® Nearly all the matter from the beginning of the chapter to this point ap- 
pears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. Eds. i and 2 contain only 
the first sentence of the chapter and then proceed, “Thus in Great Britain 
higher duties are laid upon the wines of France than upon those of Portugal. 
German linen may be imported upon paying certain duties; but French linen 
is altogether prohibited. The principles which I have been examining took 
their origin from private interest and the spirit of monopoly; those which I 
am going to examine from national prejudice and animosity.” 


Such re- 
straints 
are un- 
reasonable 
on the 
principles 
of the 
mercan- 
tile sys- 
tem, since 

(i) if free 
trade with 
France 
did lead 
to an un- 
favour- 
able bal- 
ance with 
France, it 
might yet 
not do so 
with the 
world in 
general, 



(a) apart 
of French 
imports 
might be 
re-export- 
ed and 
bring 
back gold 
and silver, 


and (3) 
thebd- 
ance can- 
not be 
certainly 
known: 


custom- 
house 
books are 
useless, 

and the 
course of 
exchange 
is little 
better. 


442 the wealth of nations 

whole French goods imported were to be consumed in Great Brit- 
ain. 

But, secondly, a great part of them might be re-exported to other 
countries, where, being sold with profit, they might bring back a 
return equal in value, perhaps, to the prime cost of the whole 
French goods imported. What has frequently been said of the East 
India trade might possibly be true of the French; that though the 
greater part of East India goods were bought with gold and silver, 
the re-exportation of a part of them to other countries, brought 
back more gold and silver to that which carried on the trade than 
the prime cost of the whole amounted to. One of the most impor*- 
tant branches of the Dutch trade, at present, consists in the car- 
riage of French goods to other European countries. Some part ^ 
even of the French wine drank in Great Britain is clandestinely im- 
ported from Holland and Zealand. If there was either a free trade 
between France and England, or if French goods could be imported 
upon paying only the same duties as those of other European na- 
tions, to be drawn back upon exportation, England might have 
some share of a trade which is found so advantageous to Holland. 

Thirdly, and lastly, there is no certain criterion by which we can 
determine on which side what is called the balance between any 
two countries lies, or which of them exports to the greatest value. 
National prejudice and animosity, prompted always by the private 
interest of particular traders, are the principles which generally di- 
rect our judgment upon all questions concerning it. There are two 
criterions, however, which have frequently been appealed to upon 
such occasions, the custom-house books and the course of exchange. 
The custom-house books, I think, it is now generally acknowledged, 
are a very uncertain criterion, on account of the inaccuracy of the 
valuation at which the greater part of goods are rated in them. The 
course of exchange ^ is, perhaps, almost equally so. 

When the exchange between two places, such as London and Pa- 
ris, is at par, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from London 
to Paris are compensated by those due from Paris to London. On 
the contrary, when a premium is paid at London for a bill upon Pa- 
ris, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from London to Paris 
are not compensated by those due from Paris to London, but that a 
balance in money must be sent out from the latter place; for the 
risk, trouble, and expence of exporting which, the premium is both 
demanded and given. But the ordinary state of debt and credit be- 

^ See Anderson, Commerce, a . d . 1601, and see above, pp. 400, 401. 

® Ed. I reads “a great part.” 

®Ed. I reads “The course of exchange, at least as it has hitherto been esti- 
mated, is, perhaps, almost equally so.” 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 443 

tween those two cities must necessarily be regulated, it is said, by 
the ordinary course of their dealings with one another. When nei- 
ther of them imports from the other to a greater amount than it ex- 
ports to that other, the debts and credits of each may compensate 
one another. But when one of them imports from the other to a 
greater value than it exports to that other,^^ the former necessarily 
becomes indebted to the latter in a greater sum than the latter be- 
comes indebted to it: the debts and credits of each do not compen- 
sate one another, and money must be sent out from that place of 
which the debts over-balance the credits. The ordinary course of 
exchange, therefore, being an indication of the ordinary state of 
debt and credit between two places, must likewise be an indication 
of the ordinary course of their exports and imports, as these neces- 
sarily regulate that state. 

But though the ordinary course of exchange should be allowed to 
be a sufficient indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit be- 
tween any two places, it would not from thence follow, that the bal- 
ance of trade was in favour of that place which had the ordinary 
state of debt and credit in its favour. The ordinary state of debt and 
credit between any two places is not always entirely regulated by 
the ordinary course of their dealings with one another; but is often 
influenced by that of the dealings of either with many other places. 
If it is usual, for example, for the merchants of England to pay for 
the goods which they buy of Hamburgh, Dantzic, Riga, &c. by bills 
upon Holland, the ordinary state of debt and credit between Eng- 
land and Holland will not be regulated entirely by the ordinary 
course of the dealings of those two- countries with one another, but 
will be influenced by that of the dealings of England with those 
other places. England may be obliged to send out every year money 
to Holland, though its annual exports to that country may exceed 
very much the annual value of its imports from thence; and though 
what is called the balance of trade may be very much in favour of 
England.^^ 

In the way, besides, in which the par of exchange has hitherto 
been computed, the ordinary course of exchange can afford no suf- 
ficient indication that the ordinary state of debt and credit is in fa- 
vour of that country which seems to have, or which is supposed to 
have, the ordinary course of exchange in its favour: or, in other 
words, the real exchange may be, and, in fact, often is so very dif- 
ferent from the computed one, that from the course of the latter. 

Here and three lines above eds. i and 2 read “it” instead of “that other.” 

Ed. I reads “common.” 

This paragraph is absent in ed. i, but the substance of it occurs in a para- 
graph lower down, omitted in ed. 2 and later eds. See below, p. 455, note 28. 


A favour- 
able ex- 
change 
with a 
particu- 
lar coun- 
try does 
not prove 
a favour- 
able bal- 
ance with 
that 

country. 


Besides, 
the ordi- 
nary 

computa- 
tion of 
exchange 
is often 
mislead- 
ing, since 



444 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

no certain conclusion can, upon many occasions, be drawn con- 
cerning that of the forrner.^^ 

When for a sum of money paid in England, containing, according 
to the standard of the English mint, a certain number of ounces of 
pure silver, you receive a bill for a sum of money to be paid in 
France, containing, according to the standard of the French mint, 
an equal number of ounces of pure silver, exchange is said to be at 
par between England and France. When you pay more, you are 
supposed to give a premium, and exchange is said to be against 
England, and in favour of France. When you pay less, you are sup- 
posed to get a premium, and exchange is said to be against France, 
and in favour of England. 

(i)money But, first, we cannot always judge of the value of the current 
below hs different countries by the standard of their respective 

nominal^ mints. In some it is more, in others it is less worn, dipt, and other- 

standard. wise degenerated from that standard. But the value of the current 

coin of every country, compared with that of any other country, is 
in proportion not to the quantity of pure silver which it ought to 
contain, but to that which it actually does contain. Before the ref- 
ormation of the silver coin in king William’s time, exchange be- 
tween England and Holland, computed, in the usual manner, ac- 
cording to the standard of their respective mints, was five and 
twenty per cent, against England. But the value of the current coin 
of England, as we learn from Mr. Lowndes, was at that time rather 
more than five and twenty per cent, below its standard value.^® The 
real exchange, therefore, may even at that time have been in favour 
of England, notwithstanding the computed exchange was so much 
against it; a smaller number of ounces of pure silver, actually paid 
in England, may have purchased a bill for a greater number of 
ounces of pure silver to be paid in Holland, and the man who was 
supposed to give, may in reality have got the premium. The French 
coin was, before the late reformation of the English gold coin, much 
less worn than the English, and was, perhaps, two or three per cent, 
nearer its standard. If the computed exchange with France, there- 
fore, was not more than two or three per cent, against England, the 
real exchange might have been in its favour. Since the reformation 
of the gold coin, the exchange has been constantly in favour of 
England, and against France. 

^ In place of this paragraph ed. i reads, “But though this doctrine, of which 
some part is, perhaps, not a little doubtful, were supposed ever so certain, the 
manne'r in which the par of exchange has hitherto been computed renders un- 
certain every conclusion that has ever yet been drawn from it.” 

Ed. I reads “standards” here and eight lines lower. 

“ See above p. 194 . 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 445 

Secondly, in some countries, the expence of coinage is defrayed 
by the government; in others, it is defrayed by the private people 
who carry their bullion to the mint, and the government even de- 
rives some revenue from the coinage. In England, it is defrayed by 
the government, and if you carry a pound weight of standard silver 
to the mint, you get back sixty-two shillings, containing a pound 
weight of the like standard silver. In France, a duty of eight per 
cent, is deducted for the coinage, which not only defrays the ex- 
pence of it, but affords a small revenue to the government.^® In 
England, as the coinage costs nothing, the current coin can never 
be much more valuable than the quantity of bullion which it actu- 
ally contains. In France, the workmanship, as you pay for it, adds 
to the value, in the same manner as to that of wrought plate. A sum 
of French money, therefore, containing a certain weight of pure 
silver, is more valuable than a sum of English money containing an 
equal weight of pure silver, and must require more bullion, or other 
commodities, to purchase it. Though the current coin of the two 
countries, therefore, were equally near the standards of their re- 
spective mints, a sum of English money could not well purchase a 
sum of French money, containing an equal number of ounces of 
pure silver, nor consequently a bill upon France for such a sum. If 
for such a bill no more additional money was paid than what was 
sufficient to compensate the expence of the French coinage, the real 
exchange might be at par between the two countries, their debts 
and credits might mutually compensate one another, while the 
computed exchange was considerably in favour of France. If less 
than this was paid, the real exchange might be in favour of Eng- 
land, while the computed was in favour of France. 

Thirdly, and lastly, in some places, as at Amsterdam, Hamburgh, 
Venice, &c. foreign bills of exchange are paid in what they call bank 
money; while in others, as at London, Lisbon, Antwerp, Leghorn, 
&c. they are paid in the common currency of the country. What is 
called bank money is always Of more value than the same nominal 
sum of common currency. A thousand guilders in the bank of Am- 
sterdam, for example, are of more value than a thousand guilders 
of Amsterdam currency. The difference between them is called the 
agio of the bank,^^ which, at Amsterdam, is generally about five per 
cent. Supposing the current money of two countries equally near 
to the standard of their respective mints, and that the one pays for- 

This erroneous statement has already been made, p. 45 ; see below, p. 518, 
for details. 

Already mentioned above, p. 312. 

Ed. 2 and later eds. read erroneously “of the two.” 


(2) coin 
is some- 
times 
raised by 
seignor- 
age above 
the value 
of the 
bullion 
contained 
in it, 


and (3) 
bank 
money 
bears an 
agio. 



446 the wealth OF NATIONS 

eign bills in this common currency, while the other pays them in 
bank money, it is evident that the computed exchange may be in 
favour of that which pays in bank money, though the real ex- 
change should be in favour of that which pays in current money; 
for the same reason that the computed exchange may be in favour 
of that which pays in better money, or in money nearer to its own 
standard, though the real exchange should be in favour of that 
which pays in worse. The computed exchange, before the late ref- 
ormation of the gold coin, was generally against London with Am- 
sterdam, Hamburgh, Venice, and, I believe, with all other places 
which pay in what is called bank money. It will by no means fol- 
low, however, that the real exchange was against it. Since the ref- 
ormation of the gold coin, it has been in favour of London even 
with those places. The computed exchange has generally been in 
favour of London with Lisbon, Antwerp, Leghorn, and, if you ex- 
cept France, I believe, with most other parts of Europe that pay in 
common currency; and it is not improbable that the real exchange 
was so too. 


Digression concerning Banks of Deposit, particularly concerning 
that of Amsterdam 


Small 
states 
must ad- 
mit 
foreign 
coin, 
which is 
of uncer- 
tain 
value. 


Banks are 
then 
estab- 
lished to 
pay in 
standard 


The currency of a great state, such as France or England, gener- 
ally consists almost entirely of its own coin. Should this currency, 
therefore, be at any time worn, dipt, or otherwise degraded below 
its standard value, the state by a reformation of its coin can effec- 
tually re-establish its currency. But the currency of a small state, 
such as Genoa or Hamburgh, can seldom consist altogether in its 
own coin, but must be made up, in a great measure, of the coins of 
all the neighbouring states with which its inhabitants have a con- 
tinual intercourse. Such a state, therefore, by reforming its coin, 
will not always be able to reform its currency. If foreign bills of 
exchange are paid in this currency, the uncertain value of any sum, 
of what is in its own nature so uncertain, must render the exchange 
always very much against such a state, its currency being, in all 
foreign states, necessarily valued even below what it is worth. 

In order to remedy the inconvenience to which this disadvanta- 
geous exchange must have subjected their merchants, such small 
states, when they began to attend to the interest of trade, have fre- 
quently enacted, that foreign bills of exchange of a certain value 
should be paid, not in common currency, but by an order upon, or 
“ See the preface to the 4 th ed., above. 



DIGRESSION ON THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM 447 

by a transfer in the books of a certain bank, established upon the 
credit, and under the protection of the state; this bank being al- 
ways obliged to pay, in good and true money, exactly according to 
the standard of the state. The banks of Venice, Genoa, Amsterdam, 
Hamburgh, and Nuremberg, seem to have been all originally es- 
tablished with this view, though some of them may have afterwards 
been made subservient to other purposes. The money of such banks 
being better than the common currency of the country, necessarily 
bore an agio, which was greater or smaller, according as the cur- 
rency was supposed to be more or less degraded below the standard 
of the state. The agio of the bank of Hamburgh, for example, 
which is said to be commonly about fourteen per cent, is the sup- 
posed difference between the good standard money of the state, and 
the dipt, worn, and diminished currency poured into it from all the 
neighbouring states. 

Before 1609 the great quantity of dipt and worn foreign coin, 
which the extensive trade of Amsterdam brought from all parts of 
Europe, reduced the value of its currency about nine per cent, be- 
low that of good money fresh from the mint. Such money no sooner 
appeared than it was melted down or carried away, as it always is 
in such circumstances. The merchants, with plenty of currency, 
could not always find a sufficient quantity of good money to pay 
their bills of exchange; and the value of those bills, in spite of sev- 
eral regulations which were made to prevent it, became in a great 
measure uncertain. 

In order to remedy these inconveniencies, a bank was established 
in 1609 under the guarantee of the city. This bank received both 
foreign coin, and the light and worn coin of the country at its real 
intrinsic value in the good standard money of the country, deduct- 
ing only so much as was necessary for defraying the expence of 
coinage, and the other necessary expence of management. For the 
value which remained, after this small deduction was made, it gave 
a credit in its books. This credit was called bank money, which, as 
it represented money exactly according to the standard of the mint, 
was always of the same real value, and intrinsically worth more 
than current money. It was at the same time enacted, that all bills 
drawn upon or negotiated at Amsterdam of the value of six hundred 
guilders and upwards should be paid in bank money, which at once 
took away all uncertainty in the value of those bills. Every mer- 
chant, in consequence of this regulation, was obliged to keep an ac- 
count with the bank in order to pay his foreign bills of exchange, 
which necessarily occasioned a certain demand for bank money. 

Bank money, over and above both its intrinsic superiority to cur- 


money 
regard- 
less of the 
condition 
of the 
coin, and 
this 
money 
bears an 
agio. 


Before 
1609 the 
common 
currenc> 
of Am- 
sterdam 
was 9 per 
cent, be- 
low the 
standard 


The bank 
was then 
estab- 
lished to 
receive 
and pay 
coin at its 
intrinsic 
value in 
good 
standard 
money. 



Money 
in the 
bank was 
not only 
up to the 
standard, 
but also 
secure 
and easily 
trans- 
ferred, so 
that it 
bore an 
agio. 


The bank 
receives 
bullion 
as wen as 
coin, giv- 
ing in ex- 
change a 
credit in 
bank 
money to 
95 per 
cent, of 
the 
value. 

It also 
gives a re- 
ceipt 

which en- 
titles the 
bearer to 
recover 


448 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

rency, and the additional value which this demand necessarily gives 
itj has likewise some other advantages. It is secure from fire, rob- 
bery, and other accidents; the city of Amsterdam is bound for it; 
it can be paid away by a simple transfer, without the trouble of 
counting, or the risk of transporting it from one place to another. 
In consequence of those different advantages, it seems from the be- 
ginning to have borne an agio, and it is generally believed that all 
the money originally deposited in the bank was allowed to remain 
there, nobody caring to demand payment of a debt which he could 
sell for a premium in the market. By demanding payment of the 
bank, the owner of a bank credit would lose this premium. As a 
shilling fresh from the mint will buy no more goods in the market 
than one of our common worn shillings, so the good and true money 
which might be brought from the coffers of the bank into those of 
a private person, being mixed and confounded with the common 
currency of the country, would be of no more value than that cur- 
rency, from which it could no longer be readily distinguished. 
While it remained in the coffers of the bank, its superiority was 
known and ascertained. When it had come into those of a private 
person, its superiority could not well be ascertained without more 
trouble than perhaps the difference was worth. By being brought 
from the coffers of the bank, besides, it lost all the other advan- 
tages of bank money; its security, its easy and safe transferability, 
its use in paying foreign bills of exchange. Over and above all this, 
it could not be brought from those coffers, as it will appear by and 
by, without previously paying for the keeping. 

Those deposits of coin, or those deposits which the bank was 
bound to restore in coin, constituted the original capital of the 
bank, or the whole value of what was represented by what is called 
bank money. At present they are supposed to constitute but a very 
small part of it. In order to facilitate the trade in bullion, the bank 
has been for these many years in the practice of giving credit in its 
books upon deposits of gold and silver bullion. This credit is gen- 
erally about five per cent, below the mint price of such bullion. The 
bank grants at the same time what is called a recipice or receipt, 
intitling the person who makes the deposit, or the bearer, to take 
out the bullion again at any time within six months, upon retrans- 
ferring to the bank a quantity of bank money equal to that for 
which credit had been given in its books when the deposit was 
made, and upon paying one-fourth per cent, for the keeping, if the 
deposit was in silver; and one-half per cent, if it was in gold; but 
at the same time declaring, that in default of such payment, and 

^Ed. I reads “Those deposits of coin, or which.” 



DIGRESSION ON THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM 449 

upon the expiration of this term, the deposit should belong to the 
bank at the price at which it had been received, or for which credit 
had been given in the transfer books. What is thus paid for the 
keeping of the deposit may be considered as a sort of warehouse 
rent; and why this warehouse rent should be so much dearer for 
gold than for silver, several different reasons have been assigned. 
The fineness of gold, it has been said, is more difficult to be ascer- 
tained than that of silver. Frauds are more easily practised, and oc- 
casion a greater loss in the more precious metal. Silver, besides, be- 
ing the standard metal, the state, it has been said, wishes to en- 
courage more the making of deposits of silver than those of gold.^^ 
Deposits of bullion are most commonly made when the price is 
somewhat lower than ordinary; and they are taken out again when 
it happens to rise. In Holland the market price of bullion is gener- 
ally above the mint price, for the same reason that it was so in Eng- 
land before the late reformation of the gold coin. The difference is 
said to be commonly from about six to sixteen stivers upon the 
mark, or eight ounces of silver of eleven parts fine, and one part al- 
loy. The bank price, or the credit which the bank gives for deposits 
of such silver (when made in foreign coin, of which the fineness is 
well known and ascertained, such as Mexico dollars), is twenty-two 
guilders the mark; the mint price is about twenty-three guilders, 
and the market price is from twenty-three guilders six, to twenty- 
three guilders sixteen stivers, or from two to three per cent, above 
the mint price.^^ The proportions between the bank price, the mint 


Eds. 1-3 have the more correct but awkward reading “than of those of 
gold.” 

The following are the prices at which the bank of Amsterdam at present 
(September 1775) receives bullion and coin of different kinds: 

SILVER. 


Mexico dollars 
French crowns 
English silver coin 


Guilders. 

B — 22 per mark. 


Mexico dollars new coin 


21 


10 


Ducatoons 3 

Rix dollars 2 8 

Bar silver containing ^^fine silver 21 per mark, and in this proportion down 
to i fine, on which 5 guilders are given. 

Fine bars, 23 per mark. 

GOLD. 


Portugal coin | 

Guineas \ B— 310 per mark. 

Louis d’ors new J 


Ditto old . . . • 300 

New ducats . . 4 19 8 per ducat. 

Bar or ingot gold is received in proportion to its fineness compared with 
the above foreign gold coin. Upon fine bars the bank gives 340 mark. In 
general, however, something more is given upon coin of a known fineness, 
than upon gold and silver bars, of which the fineness cannot be ascertained 
but by a process of melting and assaying. 


the bul- 
lion on 
repaying 
the sum 
advanced 
and pay- 
ing! per 
cent, for 
silver and 
! per cent, 
for gold. 


The re- 
ceipts are 
generally 
worth 
some- 
thing, and 
are re- 
newed at 
the end of 
each six 
months. 



The de- 
positor 
usually 
parts with 
his re- 
<.eipt. 


The bank 
money 
and the 
recdpt 
together 
equal in 
value the 
bullion 
deposited. 


450 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

price, and the market price of gold bullion, are nearly the same. A 
person can generally sell his receipt for the difference between the 
mint price of bullion and the market price. A receipt for bullion is 
almost always worth something, and it very seldom happens, there- 
fore, that any body suffers his receipt to expire, or allows his bul- 
lion to fall to the bank at the price at which it had been received, 
either by not taking it out before the end of the six months, or by 
neglecting to pay the one-fourth or one-half per cent, in order to 
obtain a new receipt for another six months. This, however, though 
it happens seldom, is said to happen sometimes, and more frequent- 
ly with regard to gold, than with regard to silver, on account of the 
higher warehouse-rent which is paid for the keeping of the more 
precious metal. 

The person who by making a deposit of bullion obtains both a 
bank credit and a receipt, pays his bills of exchange as they become 
due with his bank credit; and either sells or keeps his receipt ac- 
cording as he judges that the price of bullion is likely to rise or to 
fall. The receipt and the bank credit seldom keep long together, 
and there is no occasion that they should. The person who has a re- 
ceipt, and who wants to take out bullion, finds always plenty of 
bank credits, or bank money to buy at the ordinary price; and the 
person who has bank money, and wants to take out bullion, finds 
receipts always in equal abundance. 

The owners of bank credits, and the holders of receipts, consti- 
tute two different sorts of creditors against the bank. The holder of 
a receipt cannot draw out the bullion for which it is granted, with- 
out re-assigning to the bank a sum of bank money equal to the price 
at which the bullion had been received. If he has no bank money of 
his own, he must purchase it of those who have it. The owner of 
bank money cannot draw out bullion without producing to the 
bank receipts for the quantity which he wants. If he has none of his 
own, he must buy them of ftose who have them. The holder of a 
receipt, when he purchases bank money, purchases the power of 
taking out a quantity of bullion, of which the mint price is five per 
cent, above the bank price. The agio of five per cent, therefore, 
which he commonly pays for it, is paid, not for an imaginary, but 
for a real value. The owner of bank money, when he purchases a 
receipt, purchases the power of taking out a quantity of bullion of 
which the market price is commonly from two to three per cent, 
above the mint price. The price which he pays for it, therefore, is 
paid likewise for a real value. The price of the receipt, and the 
price of the bank money, compound or make up between them the 
full value or price of the bullion. 



DIGRESSION ON THE BANK OF AMSTERDAM 45^ 

Upon deposits of the coin current in the country, the bank grants 
receipts likewise as well as bank credits; but those receipts are fre- 
quently of no value, and will bring no price in the market. Upon 
ducatoons, for example, which in the currency pass for three guild- 
ers three stivers each, the bank gives a credit of three guilders only, 
or five per cent, below their current value. It grants a receipt like- 
wise intitling the bearer to take out the number of ducatoons de- 
posited at any time within six months, upon paying one-fourth per 
cent, for the keeping. This receipt will frequently bring no price in 
the market. Three guilders bank money generally sell in the market 
for three guilders three stivers, the full value of the ducatoons, if 
they were taken out of the bank; and before they can be taken out, 
one-fourth per cent, must be paid for the keeping, which would be 
mere loss to the holder of the receipt. If the agio of the bank, how- 
ever, should at any time fall to three per cent, such receipts might 
bring some price in the market, and might sell for one and three- 
fourths per cent. But the agio of the bank being now generally 
about five per cent, such receipts are frequently allowed to expire, 
or, as they express it, to fall to the bank. The receipts which are 
given for deposits of gold ducats fall to it yet more frequently, be- 
cause a higher warehouse-rent, or one-half per cent, must be paid 
for the keeping of them before they can be taken out again. The 
five per cent, which the bank gains, when deposits either of coin or 
bullion are allowed to fall to it, may be considered as the ware- 
house-rent for the perpetual keeping of such deposits. 

The sum of bank money for which the receipts are expired must 
be very considerable. It must comprehend the whole original capi- 
tal of the bank, which, it is generally supposed, has been allowed to 
remain there from the time it was first deposited, nobody caring 
either to renew his receipt or to take out his deposit, as, for the rea- 
sons already assigned, neither the one nor the other could be done 
without loss. But whatever may be the amount of this sum, the 
proportion which it bears to the whole mass of bank money is sup- 
posed to be very small. The bank of Amsterdam has for these many 
years past been the great warehouse of Europe for bullion, for 
which the receipts are very seldom allowed to expire, or, as they 
express it, to fall to the bank. The far greater part of the bank 
money, or of the credits upon the books of the bank, is supposed to 
have been created, for these many years past, by such deposits 
which the dealers in bullion are continually both making and with- 
drawing. 

No demand can be made upon the bank but by means of a reci- 
pice or receipt. The smaller mass of bank money, for which the re- 


Receipts 
for cur- 
rent coin 
are also 
given, but 
these are 
often of 
no value 
and are 
allowed to 
expire. 


So there 
is a con- 
siderable 
sum of 
bank 

money for 
which the 
receipts 
have ex- 
pired, but 
it IS not 
a large 
propor- 
tion of 
the whole 


This can- 
not be 



drawn out 
of the 
bank. 


So that if 
all the 
holders of 
bank 

money de- 
sired to 
exchange 
it for coin 
and bul- 
lion re- 
ceipts 
might 
command 
an ex- 
orbitant 
price, 

but it is 
supposed 
in an 
emer- 
gency the 
bank 
would 
pay out 
money or 
bullion 
without 
receipts 
being of- 
fered. 

Of late 
years the 
bank has 
always 
sold 
bank 
money at 
5 per cent, 
agio and 
bought at 
4 per cent. 


452 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ceipts are expired, is mixed and confounded with the much greater 
mass for which they are still in force; so that, though there may be 
a considerable sum of bank money, for which there are no receipts, 
there is no specific sum or portion of it, which may not at any time 
be demanded by one. The haxik cannot be debtor to two persons for 
the same thing; and the owner of bank money who has no receipt, 
cannot demand pa3mient of the bank till he buys one. In ordinary 
and quiet times, he can find no difficulty in getting one to buy at 
the market price, which generally corresponds with the price at 
which he can sell the coin or bullion it intitles him to take out of 
the bank. 

It might be otherwise during a public calamity; an invasion, for 
example, such as that of the French in 1672. The owners of bank 
money being then all eager to draw it out of the bank, in order to 
have it in their own keeping, the demand for receipts might raise 
their price to an exorbitant height. The holders of them might form 
extravagant expectations, and, instead of two or three per cent, de- 
mand half the bank money for which credit had been given upon 
the deposits that the receipts had respectively been granted for. 
The enemy, informed of the constitution of the bank, might even 
buy them up, in order to prevent the carrying away of the treasure. 
In such emergencies, the bank, it is supposed, would break through 
its ordinary rule of making payment only to the holders of receipts. 
The holders of receipts, who had no bank money, must have re- 
ceived within two or three per cent, of the value of the deposit for 
which their respective receipts had been granted. The bank, there- 
fore, it is said, would in this case make no scruple of paying, either 
with money or bullion, the full value of what the owners of bank 
money who could get no receipts were credited for in its books; 
paying at the same time two or three per cent, to such holders of 
receipts as had no bank money, that being the whole value which in 
this state of things could justly be supposed due to them. 

Even in ordinary and quiet times it is the interest of the holders 
of receipts to depress the agio, in order either to buy bank money 
(and consequently the bullion, which their receipts would then en- 
able them to take out of the bank) so much cheaper, or to sell their 
receipts to those who have bank money, and who want to take out 
bullion, so much dearer; the price of a receipt being generally equal 
to the difference between the market price of bank money, and that 
of the coin or bullion for which the receipt had been granted. It is 
the interest of the owners of bank money, on the contrary, to raise 
the agio, in order either to sell their bank money so much dearer, 
or to buy a receipt so much cheaper. To prevent the stock-jobbing 



DIGRESSION ON THE BANK OE AMSTERDAM 453 

tricks which those opposite interests might sometimes occasion, the 
bank has of late years come to the resolution to sell at all times 
bank money for currency, at five per cent, agio, and to buy it in 
again at four per cent. agio. In consequence of this resolution, the 
agio can never either rise above five, or sink below four per cent, 
and the proportion between the market price of bank and that of 
current money, is kept at all times very near to the proportion be- 
tween their intrinsic values. Before this resolution was taken, the 
market price of bank money used sometimes to rise so high as nine 
per cent, agio, and sometimes to sink so low as par, according as 
opposite interests happened to influence the market. 

The bank of Amsterdam professes to lend out no part of what is 
deposited with it, but, for every guilder for which it gives credit in 
its books, to keep in its repositories the value of a guilder either in 
money or bullion. That it keeps in its repositories all the money or 
bullion for which there are receipts in force, for which it is at all 
times liable to be called upon, and which, in reality, is continually 
going from it and returning to it again, cannot well be doubted. But 
whether it does so likewise with regard to that part of its capital, 
for which the receipts are long ago expired, for which in ordinary 
and quiet times it cannot be called upon, and which in reality is 
very likely to remain with it for ever, or as long as the States of the 
United Provinces subsist, may perhaps appear more uncertain. At 
Amsterdam, however, no point of faith is better established than 
that for every guilder, circulated as bank money, there is a corre- 
spondent guilder in gold or silver to be found in the treasure of the 
bank. The city is guarantee that it should be so. The bank is under 
the direction of the four reigning burgomasters, who are changed 
every year. Each new set of burgomasters visits the treasure, com- 
pares it with the books, receives it upon oath, and delivers it over, 
with the same awful solemnity, to the set which succeeds and in 
that sober and religious country oaths are not yet disregarded. A 
rotation of this kind seems alone a sufficient security against any 
practices which cannot be avowed. Amidst all the revolutions which 
faction has ever occasioned in the government of Amsterdam, the 
prevailing party has at no time accused their predecessors of in- 
fidelity in the administration of the bank. No accusation could have 
affected more deeply the reputation and fortune of the disgraced 
party, and if such an accusation could have been supported, we may 
be assured that it would have been brought. In 1672, when the 
French king was at Utrecht, the bank of Amsterdam paid so readily 
as left no doubt of the fidelity with which it had observed its en- 

®Ed. I reads “it” here. 


It pro- 
fesses to 
lend out 
no part 0 ^ 
the de- 
posits. 



The 

amount of 
treasure 
in the 
bank is a 
subject of 
conjec- 
ture. 


The city 
derives a 
consider- 
able rev- 
enue 
from the 
various 
profits of 
the bank. 


454 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

gagements. Some of the pieces which were then brought from its 
repositories appeared to have been scorched with the fire which hap- 
pened in the town-house soon after the bank was established.^^ 
Those pieces, therefore, must have lain there from that time. 

What may be the amount of the treasure in the bank, is a ques- 
tion which has long employed the speculations of the curious. Noth- 
ing but conjecture can be offered concerning it. It is generally reck- 
oned that there are about two thousand people who keep accounts 
with the bank, and allowing them to have, one with another, the 
value of fifteen hundred pounds sterling lying upon their respective 
accounts (a very large allowance), the whole quantity of bank 
money, and consequently of treasure in the bank, will amount to 
about three millions sterling, or, at eleven guilders the pound sterl- 
ing, thirty-three millions of guilders; a great sum, and sufficient 
to carry on a very extensive circulation; but vastly below the ex- 
travagant ideas which some people have formed of this treasure. 

The city of Amsterdam derives a considerable revenue from the 
bank. Besides what may be called the warehouse-rent above men- 
tioned, each person, upon first opening an account with the bank, 
pays a fee of ten guilders; and for every new account three guilders 
three stivers; for every transfer two stivers; and if the transfer is 
for less than three hundred guilders, six stivers, in order to discour- 
age the multiplicity of small transactions. The person who neglects 
to balance his account twice in the year forfeits twenty-five guild- 
ers. The person who orders a transfer for more than is upon his ac- 
count, is obliged to pay three per cent, for the sum overdrawn, and 
his order is set aside into the bargain. The bank is supposed too to 
make a considerable profit by the sale of the foreign coin or bullion 
which sometimes falls to it by the expiring of receipts, and which 
is always kept till it can be sold with advantage. It makes a profit 
likewise by selling bank money at five per cent, agio, and buying it 
in at four. These different emoluments amount to a good deal more 
than what is necessary for paying the salaries of officers, and de- 
fraying the expence of management. What is paid for the keeping 
of bullion upon receipts, is alone supposed to amount to a neat an- 
nual revenue of between one hundred and fifty thousand and two 
hundred thousand guilders. Public utility, however, and not rev- 
enue, was the original object of this institution. Its object was to 

^Lectures, pp. 193, 194. The story is doubtless in Voltaire, Sihcle de Louis 
XIV. f chap. X., and is quoted thence by Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1672. 

Magens, Universal Merchant, ed. Horsley, pp. 32, 33, who also pro- 
tests against the common exaggeration, gives 3,000 as a maximum estimate 
for the number of accounts, and 60,000,000 guilders as the utmost amount of 
the treasure. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 455 

relieve the merchants from the inconvenience of a disadvantageous 
exchange. The revenue which has arisen from it was unforeseen, 
and may be considered as accidental. But it is now time to return 
from this long digression, into which I have been insensibly led in 
endeavouring to explain the reasons why the exchange between the 
countries which pay in what is called bank money, and those which 
pay in common currency, should generally appear to be in favour 
of the former, and against the latter. The former pay in a species 
of money of which the intrinsic value is always the same, and ex- 
actly agreeable to the standard of their respective mints; the latter 
in a species of money of which the intrinsic value is continually 
varying, and is almost always more or less below that standard.^® 


Part II 

Of the Unreasonableness of those extraordinary Restraints upon 
other Principles 

In the foregoing Part of this Chapter I have endeavoured to shew,^® 
even upon the principles of the commercial system, how unneces- 
sary it is to lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of 
goods from those countries with which the balance of trade is sup- 
posed to be disadvantageous. 

Ed. I runs on here as follows, “But though the computed exchange must 
generally be in favour of the former, the real exchange may frequently be in 
favour of the latter.” 

^ In place of this part heading (see above, p. 440, note i) ed. i reads, in 
square-bracketed italics, “End of the Digression concerning Banks of Deposit.” 

® In place of this first line ed. i reads, “Though the computed exchange be- 
tween any two places were in every respect the same with the real, it would 
not always follow that what is called the balance of trade was in favour of 
that place which had the ordinary course of exchange in its favour. The or- 
dinary course of exchange might, indeed, in this case, be a tolerable indica- 
tion of the ordinary state of debt and credit between them, and show which 
of the two countries usually had occasion to send out money to the other. 
But the ordinary state of debt and credit between any two places is not al- 
ways entirely regulated by the ordinary course of their dealings with one an- 
other, but is influenced by that of the dealings of both with many other coun- 
tries. If it was usual, for example, for the merchants of England to pay the 
goods which they buy from Hamburgh, Dantzick, Riga, &c., by bills upon 
Holland, the ordinary state of debt and credit between England and Holland 
would not be entirely regulated by the ordinary course of the dealings of those 
two countries with one another, but would be influenced by that of England 
with those other places. England might, in this case, be annually obliged to 
send out money to Holland, though its annual exports to that country ex- 
ceeded the annual value of its imports from it, and though what is called the 
balance of trade was very much in favour of England.” 

“Hitherto I have been endeavouring to shew.” See above, p. 443> note 12. 



The 
whole 
doctrine 
of the 
balance of 
trade is 
absurd 


Where 
there is an 
even bal- 
ance and 
the ex- 
change 
consists 
wholly of 
native 
commodi- 
ties two 
countries 
trading 
will gain 
nearly 
equafly. 


456 the wealth of nations 

Nothing, however, can be more absurd than this whole doctrine 
of the balance of trade, upon which, not only these restraints, but 
almost all the other regulations of commerce are founded. When 
two places trade with one another, this doctrine supposes that, if the 
balance be even, neither of them either loses or gains; but if it leans 
in any degree to one side, that one of them loses, and the other gains 
in proportion to its declension from the exact equilibrium. Both 
suppositions are false. A trade which is forced by means of boun- 
ties and monopolies, may be, and commonly is disadvantageous to 
the country in whose favour it is meant to be established, as I shall 
endeavour to shew hereafter.^^ But that trade which, without force 
or constraint, is naturally and regularly carried on between any 
two places, is always advantageous, though not always equally so, 
to both. 

By advantage or gain, I understand, not the increase of the quan- 
tity of gold and silver, but that of the exchangeable value of the 
annual produce of the land and labour of the country, or the in- 
crease of the annual revenue of its inhabitants. 

If the balance be even, and if the trade between the two places 
consist altogether in the exchange of their native commodities, they 
will, upon most occasions, not only both gain, but they will gain 
equally, or very near equally: each will in this case afford a market 
for a part of the surplus produce of the other: each will replace a 
capital which had been employed in raising and preparing for the 
market this part of the surplus produce of the other, and which 
had been distributed among, and given revenue and maintenance to 
a certain number of its inhabitants. Some part of the inhabitants 
of each, therefore, will indirectly derive their revenue and mainte- 
nance from the other. As the commodities exchanged too are sup- 
posed to be of equal value, so the two capitals employed in the 
trade will, upon most occasions, be equal, or very nearly equal ; and 
both being employed in raising the native commodities of the two 
countries, the revenue and maintenance which their distribution 
will afford to the inhabitants of each will be equal, or very nearly 
equal. This revenue and maintenance, thus mutually afforded, will 
be greater or smaller in proportion to the extent of their dealings. If 
these should annually amount to an hundred thousand pounds, for 
example, or to a million on each side, each of them would afford an 
annual revenue in the one case of an hundred thousand pounds, in 
the other, of a million, to the inhabitants of the other. 

If their trade should be of such a nature that one of them export- 

^ Below, pp. 472,473. 

Ed I does not contain “and preparing for the market.” 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 457 

ed to the other nothing but native commodities, while the returns 
of that other consisted altogether in foreign goods; the balance, in 
this case, would still be supposed even, commodities being paid for 
with commodities. They would, in this case too, both gain, but they 
would not gain equally; and the inhabitants of the country w'hich 
exported nothing but native commodities would derive the greatest 
revenue from the trade. If England, for example, should import 
from France nothing but the native commodities of that country, 
and, not having such commodities of its own as were in demand 
there, should annually repay them by sending thither a large quan- 
tity of foreign goods, tobacco, we shall suppose, and East India 
goods; this trade, though it would give some revenue to the inhabi- 
tants of both countries, would give more to those of France than to 
those of England. The whole French capital annually employed in 
it would annually be distributed among the people of France. But 
that part of the English capital only which was employed in pro- 
ducing the English commodities with which those foreign goods 
were purchased, would be annually distributed among the people of 
England. The greater part of it would replace the capitals which 
had been employed in Virginia, Indostan, and China, and which 
had given revenue and maintenance to the inhabitants of those dis- 
tant countries. If the capitals were equal, or nearly equal, there- 
fore, this employment of the French capital would augment much 
more the revenue of the people of France, than that of the English 
capital would the revenue of the people of England. France would 
in this case carry on a direct foreign trade of consumption with Eng- 
land; whereas England would carry on a round-about trade of the 
same kind with France. The different effects of a capital employed 
in the direct, and of one employed in the round-about foreign trade 
of consumption, have already been fully explained.^^ 

There is not, probably, between any two countries, a trade which 
consists altogether in the exchange either of native commodities on 
both sides, or of native commodities on one side and of foreign 
goods on the other. Almost all countries exchange with one another 
partly native and partly foreign goods. That country, however, in 
whose cargoes there is the greatest proportion of native, and the 
least of foreign goods, will always be the principal gainer. 

If it was not with tobacco and East India goods, but with gold 
and silver, that England paid for the commodities annually im- 
ported from France, the balance, in this case, would be supposed 
uneven, commodities not being paid for with commodities, but with 
gold and silver. The trade, however, would, in this case, as in the 

Above, p. 350 . 


If one ex- 
ported 
nothing 
but native 
commodi 
ties, and 
the other 
nothing 
but 

foreign, 
both 
would 
gain, but 
the first 
would 
gain most 


Mixed 
cases con- 
form to 
the prin- 
ciple. 


It would 
be no 
worse for 
England 
to pay in 
gold and 



458 the wealth OF NATIONS 

silver foregoing, give some revenue to the inhabitants of both countries, 
tobacco France than to those of England. It would give 

° some revenue to those of England. The capital which had been em- 

ployed in producing the English goods that purchased this gold and 
silver, the capital which had been distributed among, and given 
revenue to, certain inhabitants of England, would thereby be re- 
placed, and enabled to continue that employment. The whole capi- 
tal of England would no more be diminished by this exportation of 
gold and silver, than by the exportation of an equal value of any 
other goods. On the contrary, it would, in most cases, be augmented. 
No goods are sent abroad but those for which the demand is sup- 
posed to be greater abroad than at home, and of which the returns 
consequently, it is expected, will be of more value at home than the 
commodities exported. If the tobacco which, in England, is worth 
only a hundred thousand pounds, when sent to France will purchase 
wine which is, in England, worth a hundred and ten thousand 
pounds, the exchange will augment the capital of England by ten 
thousand pounds. If a hundred thousand pounds of English gold, in 
the same manner, purchase French wine, which, in England, is 
worth a hundred and ten thousand, this exchange will equally aug- 
ment the capital of England by ten thousand pounds. As a mer- 
chant who has a hundred and ten thousand pounds worth of wine 
in his cellar, is a richer man than he who has only a hundred thou- 
sand pounds worth of tobacco in his warehouse, so is he likewise a 
richer man than he who has only a hundred thousand pounds worth 
of gold in his coffers. He can put into motion a greater quantity of 
industry, and give revenue, maintenance, and employment, to a 
greater number of people than either of the other two. But the capi- 
tal of the country is equal to the capitals of all its different inhabi- 
tants, and the quantity of industry which can be annually main- 
tained in it, is equal to what all those different capitals can main- 
tain. Both the capital of the country, therefore, and the quantity of 
industry which can be annually maintained in it, must generally be 
augmented by this exchange. It would, indeed, be more advantage- 
ous for England that it could purchase the wines of France with its 
own hard-ware and broad-cloth, than with either the tobacco of 
Virginia, or the gold and silver of Brazil and Peru. A direct foreign 
trade of consumption is always more advantageous than a round- 
about one. But a round-about foreign trade of consumption, which 
is carried on with gold and silver, does not seem to be less advan- 
tageous than any other equally round-about one. Neither is a coun- 
try which has no mines, more likely to be exhausted of gold and 
silver by this annual exportation of those metals, than one which 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 459 

does not grow tobacco by the like annual exportation of that plant. 
As a country which has wherewithal to buy tobacco will never be 
long in want of it, so neither will one be long in want of gold and 
silver which has wherewithal to purchase those metals. 

It is a losing trade, it is said, which a workman carries on with 
the alehouse; and the trade which a manufacturing nation would 
naturally carry on with a wine country, may be considered as a 
trade of the same nature. I answer, that the trade with the alehouse 
is not necessarily a losing trade. In its own nature it is just as ad- 
vantageous as any other, though, perhaps, somewhat more liable to 
be abused. The employment of a brewer, and even that of a retailer 
of fermented liquors, are as necessary divisions of labour as any 
other. It will generally be more advantageous for a workman to buy 
of the brewer the quantity he has occasion for, than to brew it 
himself, and if he is a poor workman, it will generally be more ad- 
vantageous for him to buy it, by little and little, of the retailer, than 
a large quantity of the brewer. He may no doubt buy too much of 
either, as he may of any other dealers in his neighbourhood, of the 
butcher, if he is a glutton, or of the draper, if he af ects to be a beau 
among his companions. It is advantageous to the great body of 
workmen, notwithstanding, that all these trades should be free, 
though this freedom may be abused in all of them, and is more lilce- 
ly to be so, perhaps, in some than in others. Though individuals, be- 
sides, may sometimes ruin their fortunes by an excessive consump- 
tion of fermented liquors, there seems to be no risk that a nation 
should do so. Though in every country there are many people who 
spend upon such liquors more than they can afford, there are always 
many more who spend less. It deserves to be remarked too, that, if 
we consult experience, the cheapness of wine seems to be a cause, 
not of drunkenness, but of sobriety. The inhabitants of the wine 
countries are in general the soberest people in Europe; witness the 
Spaniards, the Italians, and the inhabitants of the southern prov- 
inces of France. People are seldom guilty of excess in what is their 
daily fare. Nobody affects the character of liberality and good fel- 
lowship, by being profuse of a liquor which is as cheap as small 
beer. On the contrary, in the countries which, either from exces- 
sive heat or cold, produce no grapes, and where wine consequently 
is dear and a rarity, drunkenness is a common vice, as among the 
northern nations, and all those who live between the tropics, the 
negroes, for example, on the coast of Guinea. When a French regi- 
ment comes from some of the northern provinces of France, where 
wine is somewhat dear, to be quartered in the southern, where it is 

^^Eds. I and 2 read “make ” ®®Ed. i reads “from either ” 


The argu- 
ments 
against 
the 

French 
wine 
trade are 
faUadous. 



The 

sneaking 
arts of 
underling 
tradesmen 
have been 
erected 
into poli- 
tical 
maxims 
and com- 
merce has 
become a 
source of 
discord 
instead of 
unity. 


460 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

very cheap, the soldiers, I have frequently heard it observed, are at 
first debauched by the cheapness and novelty of good wine; but 
after a few months residence, the greater part of them become as 
sober as the rest of the inhabitants. Were the duties upon foreign 
wines, and the excises upon malt, beer, and ale, to be taken away 
all at once, it might, in the same manner, occasion in Great Britain 
a pretty general and temporary drunkenness among the middling 
and inferior ranks of people, which would probably be soon follow- 
ed by a permanent and almost universal sobriety. At present drunk- 
enness is by no means the vice of people of fashion, or of those who 
can easily afford the most expensive liquors. A gentleman drunk 
with ale, has scarce ever been seen among us.®^ The restraints upon 
the wine trade in Great Britain, besides, do not so much seem cal- 
culated to hinder the people from going, if I may say so, to the ale- 
house, as from going where they can buy the best and cheapest 
liquor. They favour the wine trade of Portugal, and discourage that 
of France. The Portuguese, it is said, indeed, are better customers 
for our manufactures than the French, and should therefore be en- 
couraged in preference to them. As they give us their custom, it is 
pretended, we should give them ours. The sneaking arts of under- 
ling tradesmen are thus erected into political maxims for the con- 
duct of a great empire; for it is the most underling tradesmen only 
who make it a rule to employ chiefly their own customers. A great 
trader purchases his goods always where they are cheapest and best, 
without regard to any little interest of this kind. 

By such maxims as these, however, nations have been taught that 
their interest consisted in beggaring all their neighbours. Each na- 
tion has been made to look with an invidious eye upon the pros- 
perity of all the nations with which it trades, and to consider their 
gain as its own loss. Commerce, which ought naturally to be, among 
nations, as among individuals, a bond of union and friendship, has 
become the most fertile source of discord and animosity. The capri- 
cious ambition of kings and ministers has not, during the present 
and the preceding century, been more fatal to the repose of Europe, 
than the impertinent jealousy of merchants and manufacturers. The 
violence and injustice of the rulers of mankind is an ancient evil, 
for which, I am afraid, the nature of human affairs can scarce ad- 
mit of a remedy. But the mean rapacity, the monopolizing spirit of 
merchants and manufacturers, who neither are, nor ought to be, 
the rulers of mankind, though it cannot perhaps be corrected, may 
very easily be prevented from disturbing the tranquillity of any 
body but themselves. 


Lectures f p. 179. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4^1 

That it was the spirit of monopoly which originally both invent- 
ed and propagated this doctrine, cannot be doubted; and they who 
first taught it were by no means such fools as they who believed it. 
In every country it always is and must be the interest of the great 
body of the people to buy whatever they want of those who sell it 
cheapest. The proposition is so very manifest, that it seems ridicu- 
lous to take any pains to prove it; nor could it ever have been called 
in question, had not the interested sophistry of merchants and 
manufacturers confounded the common sense of mankind. Their 
interest is, in this respect, directly opposite to that of the great body 
of the people. As it is the interest of the freemen of a corporation 
to hinder the rest of the inhabitants from employing any workmen 
but themselves, so it is the interest of the merchants and manufac- 
turers of every country to secure to themselves the monopoly of the 
home market. Hence in Great Britain, and in most other European 
countries, the extraordinary duties upon almost all goods imported 
by alien merchants. Hence the high duties and prohibitions upon all 
those foreign manufactures which can come into competition with 
our own. Hence too the extraordinary restraints upon the importa- 
tion of almost all sorts of goods from those countries with which 
the balance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous; that is, 
from those against whom national animosity happens to be most 
violently inflamed. 

The wealth of a neighbouring nation, however, though dangerous 
in war and politics, is certainly advantageous in trade. In a state of 
hostility it may enable our enemies to maintain fleets and armies 
superior to our own; but in a state of peace and commerce it must 
likewise enable them to exchange with us to a greater value, and 
to afford a better market, either for the immediate produce of our 
own industry, or for whatever is purchased with that produce. As 
a rich man is likely to be a better customer to the industrious peo- 
ple in his neighbourhood, than a poor, so is likewise a rich nation. 
A rich man, indeed, who is himself a manufacturer, is a very, dan- 
gerous neighbour to all those who deal in the same way. All the 
rest of the neighbourhood, however, by far the greatesti number, 
profit by the good market which his expence affords them. They 
even profit by his underselling the poorer workmen who deal in the 
same way with him. The manufacturers of a rich nation, in the 
same manner, may no doubt be very dangerous rivals to those of 
their neighbours. This very competition, however, is advantageous 
to the great body of the people, who profit greatly besides by the 
good market which the great expence of such a nation affords them 
in every other way. Private people who want to make a fortune, 


The so- 
phistry of 
merchants 
inspired 
by the 
spirit of 
monopoly 
has con- 
founded 
the com- 
mon-sense 
of man- 
kind. 


Wealthy 
neigh- 
bours are 
an ad- 
vantage to 
a nation 
as well as 
an indi- 
vidual. 



The 
French 
tradeoff 
not re- 
strained, 
would be 
much 
more ad- 
vanta- 
geous to 
Great 
Britain 
than the 
American. 


462 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

never think of retiring to the remote and poor provinces of the 
country, but resort either to the capital, or to some of the great 
commercial towns. They know, that, where little wealth circulates, 
there is little to be got, but that where a great deal is in motion, 
some share of it may f^ to them. The same maxims which would 
in this manner direct the common sense of one, or ten, or twenty 
individuals, should regulate the judgment of one, or ten, or twenty 
millions, and should make a whole nation regard the riches of its 
neighbours, as a probable cause and occasion for itself to acquire 
riches. A nation that would enrich itself by foreign trade, is cer- 
tainly most likely to do so when its neighbours are all rich, indus- 
trious, and commercial nations. A great nation surrounded on all 
sides by wandering savages and poor barbarians might, no doubt, 
acquire riches by the cultivation of its own lands, and by its own in- 
terior commerce, but not by foreign trade. It seems to have been in 
this manner that the ancient Egyptians and the modern Chinese 
acquired their great wealth. The ancient Egyptians, it is said, neg- 
lected foreign commerce,®® and the modern Chinese, it is known, 
hold it in the utmost contempt,®® and scarce deign to afford it the 
decent protection of the laws. The modern maxims of foreign com- 
merce, by aiming at the impoverishment of all our neighbours, so 
far as they are capable of producing their intended effect, tend to 
render that very commerce insignificant and contemptible. 

It is in consequence of these maxims that the commerce between 
France and England has in both countries been subjected to so 
many discouragements and restraints. If those two countries, how- 
ever, were to consider their real interest, without either mercantile 
jealousy or national animosity, the commerce of France might be 
more advantageous to Great Britain than that of any other coun- 
try, and for the same reason that of Great Britain to France. France 
is die nearest neighbour to Great Britain. In the trade between the 
southern coast of England and the northern and north-western 
coasts of France, the returns might be expected, in the same man- 
ner as in the inland trade, four, five, or six times in the year. The 
capital, therefore, employed in this trade, could in each of the two 
countries keep in motion four, five, or six times the quantity of in- 
dustry, and afford employment and subsistence to four, five, or six 
times the number of people, which an equal capital could do in the 
greater part of the other branches of foreign trade. Between the 
parts of France and Great Britain most remote from one another, 
the returns might be expected, at least, once in the year, and even 
this trade would so far be at least equally advantageous as the 

Above, p 348 Below, p. 644 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4^3 

greater part of the other branches of our foreign European trade. 
It would be, at least, three times more advantageous, than the 
boasted trade with our North American colonies, in which the re- 
turns were seldom made in less than three years, frequently not in 
less than four or five years. France, besides, is supposed to contain 
twenty-four millions of inhabitants.^'^ Our North American colonies 
were never supposed to contain more than three millions: And 
France is a much richer country than North America; though, on 
account of the more unequal distribution of riches, there is much 
more poverty and beggary in the one country, than in the other. 
France therefore could afford a market at least eight times more 
extensive, and, on account of the superior frequency of the returns, 
four and twenty times more advantageous, than that which our 
North American colonies ever afforded. The trade of Great Britain 
would be just as advantageous to France, and, in proportion to the 
wealth, population and proximity of the respective countries, would 
have the same superiority over that which France carries on with 
her own colonies. Such is the very great difference between that 
trade which the wisdom of both nations has thought proper to dis- 
courage, and that which it has favoured the most. 

But the very same circumstances which would have rendered an 
open and free commerce between the two countries so advantage- 
ous to both, have occasioned the principal obstructions to that com- 
merce. Being neighbours, they are necessarily enemies, and the 
wealth and power of each becomes, upon that account, more for- 
midable to the other; and what would increase the advantage of 
national friendship, serves only to inflame the violence of national 
animosity. They are both rich and industrious nations; and the 
merchants and manufacturers of each, dread the competition of the 
skill and activity of those of the other. Mercantile jealousy is ex- 
cited, and both inflames, and is itself inflamed, by the violence of 
national animosity: And the traders of both countries have an- 
nounced, with all the passionate confidence of interested falsehood, 
the certain ruin of each, in consequence of that unfavourable bal- 
ance of trade, which, they pretend, would be the infallible effect of 
an unrestrained commerce with the other 

There is no commercial country in Europe of which the ap- 
proaching ruin has not frequently been foretold by the pretended 
doctors of this system, from an unfavourable balance of trade. 
After all the anxiety, however, which they have excited about this, 

^ See below, p 856 See below, p 889. 

^ This and the preceding paragraph appear first in Additions and Correc- 
tions and ed. 3. 


But the 
traders of 
France 
and Eng- 
land are 
jealous of 
each 
other. 


No coun- 
try has 
ever been 
impov- 
erished by 



an unfa- 
vourable 
balance, 
and those 
which 
have the 
freest 
trade 
have been 
the most 
enriched 
by foreign 
trade. 


Prosperity 
and decay 
depend on 
the bal- 
ance of 
produce 
and con- 
sumption, 


which is 
quite dif- 
ferent 
from the 
balance 
of trade, 


and may 
be con- 
stantly in 
favour of 
a nation 


464 the wealth of nations 

after all the vain attempts of almost all trading nations to turn that 
balance in their own favour and against their neighbours, it does not 
appear that any one nation in Europe has been in any respect im- 
poverished by this cause. Every town and country, on the contrary, 
in proportion as they have opened their ports to all nations, instead 
of being ruined by this free trade, as the principles of the com- 
mercial system would lead us to expect, have been enriched by it. 
Though there are in Europe, indeed, a few towns which in some 
respects deserve the name of free ports, there is no country which 
does so. Holland, perhaps, approaches the nearest to this character 
of any, though still very remote from it; and Holland, it is ac- 
knowledged, not only derives its whole wealth, but a great part of 
its necessary subsistence, from foreign trade. 

There is another balance, indeed, which has already been ex- 
plained,^® very different from the balance of trade, and which, ac- 
cording as it happens to be either favourable or unfavourable, 
necessarily occasions the prosperity or decay of every nation. This 
is the balance of the annual produce and consumption. If the ex- 
changeable value of the annual produce, it has already been ob- 
served, exceeds that of the annual consumption, the capital of the 
society must annually increase in proportion to this excess. The 
society in this case lives within its revenue, and what is annually 
saved out of its revenue, is naturally added to its capital, and em- 
ployed so as to increase still further the annual produce. If the ex- 
changeable value of the annual produce, on the contrary, fall short 
of the annual consumption, the capital of the society must annual- 
ly decay in proportion to this deficiency. The expence of the so- 
ciety in this case exceeds its revenue, and necessarily encroaches 
upon its capital. Its capital, therefore, must necessarily decay, and, 
together with it, the exchangeable value of the annual produce of 
its industry. 

This balance of produce and consumption is entirely different 
from, what is called, the balance of trade. It might take place in a 
nation which had no foreign trade, but which was entirely separated 
from all the world. It may take place in the whole globe of the 
earth, of which the wealth, population, and improvement may be 
either gradually increasing or gradually decaying. 

The balance of produce and consumption may be constantly in 
favour of a nation, though what is called the balance of trade be 
generally against it. A nation may import to a greater value than it 
exports for half a century, perhaps, together; the gold and silver 
which comes into it during all this time may be all immediately sent 

"Above, p. 321; Lectures, p. 207. 



RESTRAINTS ON PARTICULAR IMPORTS 4^5 

out of it; its circulating coin may gradually decay, different sorts 
of paper money being substituted in its place, and even the debts 
too which it contracts in the principal nations with whom it deals, 
may be gradually increasing; and yet its real wealth, the ex- 
changeable value of the annual produce of its lands and labour, 
may, during the same period, have been increasing in a much great- 
er proportion. The state of our North American colonies, and of 
the trade which they carried on with Great Britain, before the 
commencement of the present disturbances,^^ may serve as a proof 
that this is by no means an impossible supposition. 

^This paragraph was written in the year 1775. But not exactly as it stands, 
since ed. i reads “the late disturbances” instead of “the present disturbances ” 
We can only conjecture that Smith thought that the disturbances were past 
either when he was writing or when he returned the proof to the printers, or 
that they would be past by the time his book was published. The alteration of 
“late” to “present” was made in ed. 2, and the footnote added in ed. 3. All eds. 
read “present disturbances” on pp. 540, 552 and 580 and “late disturbances” 
on p. 544- The two expressions could scarcdy have been used at the same time, 
so we must suppose that “late” was corrected into “present” on pp. 540, 552 
and 580, or that “present” was corrected into “late” on p, 544, but we cannot 
tell for certain which of the two things happened. 


when the 
balance of 
trade is 
against it 



BOOK IV 


Mer- 
chants 
demand 
encour- 
agements 
to expor- 
tation. 

Draw- 
backs of 
duty paid 
on domes- 
tic pro- 
duce are 
reason- 
able, as 
they pre- 
serve the 
natural 
distribu- 
tion of 
labour. 


So are 
also draw- 
backs of 
duty paid 
on goods 
imported. 


CHAPTER IV 

OF DRAWBACKS 

Merchants and manufacturers are not contented with the monop- 
oly of the home market, but desire likewise the most extensive for- 
eign sale for their goods. Their country has np jurisdiction in for- 
eign nations, and therefore can seldom procure them any monopoly 
there. They are generally obliged, therefore, to content themselves 
with petitioning for certain encouragements to exportation. 

Of these encouragements what are called Drawbacks seem to be 
the most reasonable. To allow the merchant to draw back upon ex- 
portation, either the whole or a part of whatever excise or inland 
duty is imposed upon domestic industry, can never occasion the 
exportation of a greater quantity of goods than what would have 
been exported had no duty been imposed. Such encouragements do 
not tend to turn towards any particular employment a greater share 
of the capital of the country, than what would go to that employ- 
ment ^ of its own accord, but only to hinder the duty from driving 
away any part of that share to other employments. They tend not 
to overturn that balance which naturally establishes itself among 
all the various employments of the society; but to hinder it from 
being overturned by the duty. They tend not to destroy, but to 
preserve, what it is in most cases advantageous to preserve, the nat- 
ural division and distribution of labour in the society. 

The same thing may be said of the drawbacks upon the re- 
exportation of foreign goods imported; which in Great Britain gen- 
erally amount to by much the largest part of the duty upon impor- 
tation.^ By the second of the rules, annexed to the act of parlia- 
ment,^ which imposed, what is now called, the old subsidy, every 
merchant, whether English or alien, was allowed to draw back half 

^ Eds. I and 2 read ‘‘go to it.’' 

* The next three pages are not in eds. i and 2 ; see below, p. 470, note. 

® 12 Car. IL, c. 4. 


466 



DRAWBACKS 467 

that duty upon exportation; the English merchant, provided the 
exportation took place within twelve months; the alien, provided it 
took place within nine months. Wines, currants, and wrought silks 
were the only goods which did not fall within this rule, having 
other and more advantageous allowances. The duties imposed by 
this act of parliament were, at that time, the only duties upon the 
importation of foreign goods. The term within which this, and all 
other drawbacks, could be claimed, was afterwards (by 7 Geo. 1 . 
chap. 21. sect. 10.) extended to three years.^ 

The duties which have been imposed since the old subsidy, are, 
the greater part of them, wholly drawn back upon exportation. 
This general rule, however, is liable to a great number of excep- 
tions, and the doctrine of drawbacks has become a much less sim- 
ple matter, than it was at their first institution. 

Upon the exportation of some foreign goods, of which it was 
expected that the importation would greatly exceed what was 
necessary for the home consumption, the whole duties are drawn 
back, without retaining even half the old subsidy. Before the re- 
volt of our North American colonies, we had the monopoly of the 
tobacco of Maryland and Virginia. We imported about ninety-six 
thousand hogsheads, and the home consumption was not supposed 
to exceed fourteen thousand.® To facilitate the great exportation 
which was necessary, in order to rid us of the rest, the whole duties 
were drawn back, provide^ the exportation took place within three 
years.^ 

We still have, though not altogether, yet very nearly, the monop- 
oly of the sugars of our West Indian islands. If sugars are exported 
within a year, therefore, all the duties upon importation are drawn 
back*^ and if exported within three years, all the duties, except 
half the old subsidy, which still continues to be retained upon the 
exportation of the greater part of goods. Though the importation 
of sugar exceeds, a good deal, what is necessary for the home con- 
sumption, the excess is inconsiderable, in comparison of what it 
used to be in tobacco.* 

Some goods, the particular objects of the jealousy of our own 
manufacturers, are prohibited to be imported for home consump- 
tion. They may, however, upon paying certain duties, be imported 
and warehoused for exportation. But upon such exportation, no 
part of these duties are drawn back. Our manufacturers are unwill- 

^ Henry Saxby, The British Customs, containing an Historical and Prac- 
tical Account of each branch of that part of the Revenue, 1757, pp. 10, 308. 

® These figures are also quoted above, p. 353, and below, pp. 568, 5^9. 

® Saxby, British Customs, p. 12. Ibid., p. ii. 


Under the 
old sub- 
sidy a 
drawback 
of one- 
half is al- 
lowed. 


Of more 
recent 
duties the 
whole is 
generally 
allowed, 

and in 
some cases 
the whole 
even of 
the old 
subsidy is 
allowed. 


In the 
case of 
some pro- 
hibited 
goods 
there is 



no draw- 
back. 


French 
imports 
generally 
are al- 
lowed a 
smaller 
drawback 
on re-ex- 
portation. 

Wines 
have been 
peculiar- 
ly fa- 
voured, 


468 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ing, it seems, that even this restricted importation should be en- 
couraged, and are afraid lest some part of these goods should be 
stolen out of the warehouse, and thus come into competition with 
their own. It is under these regulations only that we can import 
wrought silks,® French cambrics and lawns,® callicoes painted, 
printed, stained, or dyed, &c. 

We are unwilling even to be the carriers of French goods, and 
choose rather to forego a profit to ourselves, than to suffer those, 
whom we consider as our enemies, to make any profit by our means. 
Not only half the old subsidy, but the second twenty-five per cent, 
is retained upon the exportation of all French goods.^® 

By the fourth of the rules annexed to the old subsidy, the draw- 
back allowed upon the exportation of all wines amounted to a great 
deal more than half the duties which were, at that time, paid upon 
their importation; and it seems, at that time, to have been the ob- 
ject of the legislature to give somewhat more than ordinary en- 
couragement to the carrying trade in wine. Several of the other 
duties too, which were imposed, either at the same time, or subse- 
quent to the old subsidy; what is called the additional duty, the 
new subsidy, the one-third and two-thirds subsidies, the impost 
1692, the coinage on wine, were allowed to be wholly drawn back 
upon exportation.^^ All those duties, however, except the additional 
duty and impost 1692,^^ being paid down in ready money, upon 
importation, the interest of so large a sum occasioned an expence, 
which made it unreasonable to expect any profitable carrying trade 
in this article. Only a part, therefore, of the duty called the impost 
on wine,^® and no part of the twenty-five pounds the tun upon 
French wines,^^ or of the duties Imposed in 1745,^® in 1763,^® and 
in 1778,^^ were allowed to be drawn back upon exportation. The 
two imposts of five per cent., imposed in 1779 and 1781, upon all 


®6 Geo. III., c. 28; II Geo. III., c. 49. ** Above, p. 440. 

7 and 8 W. HI., c. 20; i Geo. I., c. 12, § 3 ; Saxby, British Customs, p. 45 ; 
above p. 440. The first 25 per cent, was imposed in 11592, the second in i6g6. 

^ Saxby, British Customs, pp. 13, 22, 39> 46. “The additional duty” was 
imposed in 1703. For the “impost 1692” and the subsidies see above, pp. 440, 
441, and below, pp. 830, 831. “The coinage on wine” was the duty levied 
under 18 Car. II., c. $, for defraying the expenses of the mint. 

“ Saxby, British Customs, pp. 13, 38. 

“ I Jac. II,, c. 3, and continuing Acts: £8 a tun on French and £12 on 
other wine. 

^^7 and 8 W. HI., c. 20, § 3; I Geo. L, st. 2, c. 12, § 3. 

“ 18 Geo. H., c. 9; Saxby, British Customs, p. 64: £8 a tun on French and 
£4 on other wine. 

“ ? 1762. 3 Geo. III., c. 12: £8 a tun on French and £4 on other wine. 

18 Geo. III., c. 27: £8 8s. on French and £4 4s. on other wine. 



DRAWBACKS 4^9 

the former duties of customs, being allowed to be wholly drawn 
back upon the exportation of all other goods, were likewise allowed 
to be drawn back upon that of wine. The last duty that has been 
particularly imposed upon wine, that of 1780,1® is allowed to be 
wholly drawn back, an indulgence, which, when so many heavy 
duties are retained, most probably could never occasion the expor- 
tation of a single tun of wine. These rules take place with regard to 
all places of lawful exportation, except the British colonies in 
America. 

The isth Charles II. chap. 7. called an act for the encourage- especially 
ment of trade,^® had given Great Britain the monopoly of supply- 
ing the colonies with all the commodities of the growth or manu- the Amer- 
facture of Europe; and consequently with wines. In a country of icancolo- 
so extensive a coast as our North American and West Indian colo- 
nies, where our authority was always so very slender, and where the 
inhabitants were allowed to carry out, in their own ships, their non- 
enumerated commodities, at first, to all parts of Europe, and after- 
wards, to all parts of Europe South of Cape Finisterre,^^ it is not 
very probable that this monopoly could ever be much respected; 
and they probably, at all times, found means of bringing back some 
cargo from the countries to which they were allowed to carry out 
one. They seem, however, to have found some difficulty in import- 
ing European wines from the places of their growth, and they could 
not well import them from Great Britain, where they were loaded 
with many heavy duties, of which a considerable part was not 
drawn back upon exportation. Madeira wine, not being a Euro- 
pean commodity could be imported directly into America and 
the West Indies, countries which, in all their non-enumerated 
commodities, enjoyed a free trade to the island of Madeira. These 
circumstances had probably introduced that general taste for Ma- 
deira wine, which our officers found established in all our colonies 
at the commencement of the war which began in 1755, and which 
they brought back with them to the mother-country, where that 
wine had not been much in fashion before. Upon the conclusion of 

5 per cent., not on the value of the goods, but on the amount of the 
previously existing duties; 19 Geo. Ill,, c. 25, and 22 Geo. III., c. 66. 

20 Geo. Ill,, c. 30: £8 a tun on French and £4 on other wine. 

"‘The colonial part of the Act is said in its particular preamble (§ 5) to be 
for the purpose of “maintaining a greater correspondence and kindness be- 
tween” the colonies and mother country, and for keeping the colonies “in a 
firmer dependence.” 

^ All this is dealt with in greater detail below, pp. 543-546. 

“The framers of the Act were not so sure about Madeira being non- 
European. They excepted wine of the Madeiras and Azores by special pro- 
vision, § 7 of IS Car. II., c. 7, § 13. 



though 
the export 
of other 
foreign 
commodi- 
ties to 
those col- 
onies was 
discour- 
aged. 


Draw- 

backs 

were 

originally 
granted to 
encourage 
the carry- 
ing trade, 
which was 
absurd, 
but they 
are rea- 
sonable 
enough. 


The reve- 
nue gains 
by their 


470 the wealth of nations 

that war, in 1763 (by the 4th Geo. Ill, Chap. 15. Sect. 12.), all the 
duties, except 3L lo^. were allowed to be drawn back, upon the ex- 
portation to the colonies of all wines, except French wines, to the 
commerce and consumption of which national prejudice would al- 
low no sort of encouragement. The period between the granting 
of this indulgence and the revolt of our North American colonies 
was probably too short to admit of any considerable change in the 
customs of those countries. 

The same act, which, in the drawback upon all wines, except 
French wines, thus favoured the colonies so much more than other 
countries; in those, upon the greater part of other commodities, 
favoured them much less. Upon the exportation of the greater part 
of commodities to other countries, half the old subsidy was drawn 
back. But this law enacted, that no part of that duty should be 
drawn back upon the exportation to the colonies of any commodi- 
ties, of the growth or manufacture either of Europe or the East 
Indies, except wines, white callicoes and muslins.^^ 

Drawbacks were, perhaps, originally granted for the encourage- 
ment of the carrying trade, which, as the freight of the ships is fre- 
quently paid by foreigners in money, was supposed to be peculiarly 
fitted for bringing gold and silver into the country. But though the 
carrying trade certainly deserves no peculiar encouragement, 
though the motive of the institution was, perhaps, abundantly fool- 
ish, the institution itself seems reasonable enough. Such drawbacks 
cannot force into this trade a greater share of the capital of the 
country than what would have gone to it of its own accord, had 
there been no duties upon importation. They only prevent its being 
excluded altogether by those duties. The carrying trade, though it 
deserves no preference, ought not to be precluded, but to be left 
free like all other trades. It is a necessary resource for those capi- 
tals which cannot find Employment either in the agriculture or in 
the manufactures of the country, either in its home trade or in its 
foreign trade of consumption. 

The revenue of the customs, instead of suffering, profits from 
such drawbacks, by that part of the duty which is retained. If the 
whole duties had been retained, the foreign goods upon which they 

®®From the words “duty upon importation” at the end of the first sentence 
of the third paragraph of the chapter to this point is new matter, which ap- 
pears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. Eds. i and 2 read in place 
of it simply, “Half the duties imposed by what is called the old subsidy, arc 
drawn back universally, except upon goods exported to the British planta- 
tions; and frequently the whole, almost always a part of those imposed by 
later subsidies and imposts.” The provision of 4 Geo. III., c. 15, taking away 
drawbacks, is quoted below, p. 550. 



DRAWBACKS 47i 

are paid, could seldom have been exported, nor consequently im- 
ported, for want of a market. The duties, therefore, of which a part 
is retained, would never have been paid. 

These reasons seem sufi&ciently to justify drawbacks, and would 
justify them, though the whole duties, whether upon the produce of 
domestic industry, or upon foreign goods, were dways drawn back 
upon exportation. The revenue of excise would in this case, indeed, 
suffer a little, and that of the customs a good deal more; but the 
natural balance of industry, the natural division and distribution 
of labour, which is always more or less disturbed by such duties, 
would be more nearly re-established by such a regulation. 

These reasons, however, will justify drawbacks only upon ex- 
porting goods to those countries which are altogether foreign and 
independent, not to those in which our merchants and manufac- 
turers enjoy a monopoly. A drawback, for example, upon the ex- 
portation of European goods to our American colonies, will not al- 
ways occasion a greater exportation than what would have taken 
place without it. By means of the monopoly which our merchants 
and manufacturers enjoy there, the same quantity might frequent- 
ly, perhaps, be sent thither, though the whole duties were retained. 
The drawbackj therefore, may frequently be pure loss to the reve- 
nue of excise and customs, without altering the state of the trade, 
or rendering it in any respect more extensive. How far such draw- 
backs can be justified, as a proper encouragement to the industry 
of our colonies, or how far it is advantageous to the mother-country, 
that they should be exempted from taxes which are paid by all the 
rest of their fellow-subjects, will appear hereafter when I come to 
treat of colonies. 

Drawbacks, however, it must always be understood, are useful 
only in those cases in which the goods for the exportation of which 
they are given, are really exported to some foreign country; and not 
clandestinely re-imported into our own. That some drawbacks, par- 
ticularly those upon tobacco, have frequently been abused in this 
manner, and have given occasion to many frauds equally hurtful 
both to the revenue and to the fair trader, is well known. 


existence 
when they 
do not 
amount to 
the whole 
of the 
duty paid. 

They 
would be 
justified 
even if 
they al- 
ways did 
amount to 
the whole 
duty paid, 

but only 
to inde- 
pendent 
countries, 
not to 
those in 
respect of 
which 
there is a 
monopoV 
of trade. 


They give 
rise to 
frauds. 


Below, pp. 549-SSi- 



CHAPTER V 


Foreign- 
ers cannot 
be forced 
to buy 
our goods, 
so it is 
proposed 
to pay 
them to 
do so. 


Bounties 
are not 
demanded 
for any 
but losing 
trades, 


OF BOUNTIES 

Bounties upon exportation are, in Great Britain, frequently peti- 
tioned for, and sometimes granted to tlie produce of particular 
branches of domestic industry. By means of them our merchants 
and manufacturers, it is pretended, will be enabled to sell their 
goods as cheap or cheaper than their rivals in the foreign market. 
A greater quantity, it is said, will thus be exported, and the bal- 
ance of trade consequently turned more in favour of our own coun- 
try. We cannot give our workmen a monopoly in the foreign, as we 
have done in the home market. We cannot force foreigners to buy 
their goods, as we have done our own countrymen. The next best 
expedient, it has been thought, therefore, is to pay them for buy- 
ing. It is in this manner that the mercantile system proposes to en- 
rich the whole country, and to put money into all our pockets by 
means of the balance of trade. 

Bounties, it is allowed, ought to be given to those branches of 
trade only which cannot be carried on without them. But every 
branch of trade in which the merchant can sell his goods for a price 
which replaces to him, with the ordinary profits of stock, the 
whole capital employed in preparing and sending them to market, 
can be carried on without a bounty. Every such branch is evidently 
upon a level with all the other branches of trade which are carried 
on without bounties, and cannot therefore require one more than 
they. Those trades only require bounties in which the merchant is 
obliged to sell his goods for a price which does not replace to him 
his capital, together with the ordinary profit; or in which he is 
obliged to sell them for less than it really costs him to send them to 
market. The bounty is given in order to make up this loss, and to 
encourage him to continue, or perhaps to begin, a trade of which the 
expence is supposed to be greater than the returns, of which every 
operation eats up a part of the capital employed in it, and which is 
of such a nature, that, if all other trades resembled it, there would 
soon be no capital left in the country. 

472 



BOUNTIES 473 

The trades, it is to be observed, which are carried on by means of 
bounties, are the only ones which can be carried on between two 
nations for any considerable time together, in such a manner as 
that one of them shall always and regularly lose, or sell its goods 
for less than it really costs to send them to market. But if the 
bounty did not repay to the merchant what he would otherwise 
lose upon the price of his goods, his own interest would soon oblige 
him to employ his stock in another way, or to find out a trade in 
which the price of the goods would replace to him, with the ordin- 
ary profit, the capital employed in sending them to market. The 
effect of bounties, like that of all the other expedients of the mer- 
cantile system, can only be to force the trade of a country into a 
channel much less advantageous than that in which it would natur- 
ally run of its own accord. 

The ingenious and well-informed author of the tracts upon the 
corn-trade ^ has shown very clearly, that since the bounty upon the 
exportation of corn was first established, the price of the corn ex- 
ported, valued moderately enough, has exceeded that of the corn 
imported, valued very high, by a much greater sum than the 
amount of the whole bounties which have been paid during that 
period. This, he imagines, upon the true principles of the mercan- 
tile system, is a clear proof that this forced corn trade is beneficial 
to the nation; the value of the exportation exceeding that of the im- 
portation by a much greater sum than the whole extraordinary ex- 
pence which the public has been at in order to get it exported. He 
does not consider that this extraordinary expence, or the bounty, is 
the smallest part of the expence which the exportation of corn real- 
ly costs the society. The capital which the farmer employed in 
raising it, must likewise be taken into the account. Unless the price 
of the corn when sold in the foreign markets replaces, not only the 
bounty, but this capital, together with the ordinary profits of stock, 
the society is a loser by the difference, or the national stock is so 
much diminished. But the very reason for which it has been thought 
necessary to grant a bounty, is the supposed insufficiency of the 
price to do this. 

The average price of corn, it has been said, has fallen consider- 
ably since the establishment of the bounty. That the average price 
of corn began to fall somewhat towards the end of the last century, 
and has continued to do so during the course of the sixty-four first 
years of the present, I have already endeavoured to show. But this 


and their 
effect is to 
force 
trade into 
disadvan- 
tageous 
channels 


Charles 
Smith 
forgets 
the cost 
of raising 
the corn 
upon 
which the 
bounty is 
paid 


The fall in 
the price 
of corn 
since the 
establish- 
ment of 


^ Charles Smith (already described as “very well-informed” above, p. 428), 
Thne Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws, and ed , 1766, pp. 132-138. 



the 

bounty is 
due to 
other 
causes. 


The 
bounty 
keeps up 
the price 
both in 
years of 
plenty 
and of 
scarcity 


It has 
been sup- 
posed to 
encourage 
cultiva- 
tion ard 
so to 
lower 
pnce. 


474 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

event, supposing it to be as real as I believe it to be, must have 
happened in spite of the bounty, and cannot possibly have hap- 
pened in consequence of it. It has happened in France, as well as in 
England, though in France there was, not only no bounty, but, till 
1764, the exportation of corn was subjected to a general prohibi- 
tion .2 This gradual fall in the average price of grain, it is prob- 
able, therefore, is ultimately owing neither to the one regulation 
nor to the other, but to that gradual and insensible rise in the real 
value of silver, which, in the first book of this discourse, I have 
endeavoured to show has taken place in the general market of Eu- 
rope, during the course of the present century.^ It seems to be 
altogether impossible that the bounty could ever contribute to 
lower the price of grain.^ 

In years of plenty, it has already been observed,® the bounty, by 
occasioning an extraordinary exportation, necessarily keeps up the 
price of corn in the home market above what it would naturally 
fall to. To do so was the avowed purpose of the institution. In years 
of scarcity, though the bounty is frequently suspended, yet the 
great exportation which it occasions in years of plenty, must fre- 
quently hinder more or less the plenty of one year from relieving 
lie scarcity of another. Both in years of plenty, and in years of 
scarcity, therefore, the bounty necessarily tends to raise the money 
price of corn somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in the 
home market. 

That, in the actual state of tillage, the bounty must necessarily 
have this tendency, will not, I apprehend, be disputed by any rea- 
sonable person. But it has been thought by many people that it 
tends to encourage tillage, and that in two different ways; first, by 
opening a more extensive foreign market to the corn of the farmer, 
it tends, they imagine, to increase the demand for, and consequently 
the production of that commodity; and secondly, by securing to 
him a better price than he could otherwise expect in the actual state 
of tillage, it tends, they suppose, to encourage tillage. This double 
encouragement must, they imagine, in a long period of years, occa- 
sion such an increase in the production of corn, as may lower its 
price in the home market, much more than the bounty can raise it, 
in the actual state which tillage may, at the end of that period, hap- 
pen to be in.® 

® Above, vol. i., pp. 195-198. 

“ Above, vol. i., pp. 197-210, and cp. p. 405. 

^ These three sentences beginning with “It has happened in France,” appear 
first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. 

" Above, vol. i., p. 197. 

®Eds. I and 2 read (beginning at the third line of the paragraph) “But it 



BOUNTIES 475 

I answer, that whatever extension of the foreign market can be Theaddi- 
occasioned by the bounty, must, in every particular year, be alto- ^ ^ce 
gether at the expence of the home market; as every bushel of corn corn at 
which is exported by means of the bounty, and which would not 
have been exported without the bounty, would have remained in 
the home market to increase the consumption, and to lower the bounty is 
price of that commodity. The corn bounty, it is to be observed, as ^ heavy 
well as every other bounty upon exportation, imposes two different people,^ ^ 
taxes upon the people; first, the tax which they are obliged to con- which re- 
tribute, in order to pay the bounty; and secondly, the tax which 
arises from the advanced price of the commodity in the home mar- tion and 

ket, and which, as the whole body of the people are purchasers of industry 
corn, must, in this particular commodity, be paid by the whole thelSig 

body of the people. In this particular commodity, therefore, this run tends 

second tax is by much the heaviest of the two. Let us suppose that, 
taking one year with another, the bounty of five shillings upon the consump- 
exportation of the quarter of wheat, raises the price of that com- tion of 
modity in the home market only sixpence the bushel, or four shill- 
ings the quarter, higher than it otherways would have been in the 
actual state of the crop. Even upon this very moderate supposition,^ 
the great body of the people, over and above contributing the tax 
which pays the bounty of five shillings upon every quarter of wheat 
exported, must pay another of four shillings upon every quarter 
which they themselves consume. But, according to the very well 
informed author of the tracts upon the corn-trade, the average 
proportion of the corn exported to that consumed at home, is not 
more than that of one to thirty-one.® For every five shillings, there- 
fore, which they contribute to the payment of the first tax, they 
must contribute six pounds four shillings to the payment of the 
second. So very heavy a tax upon the first necessary of life, must 
either reduce the subsistence of the labouring poor, or it must occa- 
sion some augmentation in their pecuniary wages, proportionable 
to that in the pecuniary price of their subsistence. So far as it oper- 
ates in the one way, it must reduce the ability of the labouring poor 

has been thought by many people, that by securing to the farmer a better 
price than he could otherwise expect in the actual state of tillage, it tends to 
encourage tillage; and that the consequent increase of corn may, in a long 
period of years, lower its price more than the bounty can raise it in the actual 
state which tillage may at the end of that period happen to be in.” The alter- 
ation is given in Additions and Corrections. The next two paragraphs appear 
first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. 

’ It is really anything but a moderate supposition. It is not at all Hkely that 
the increase of demand caused by the offer of a bounty on exportation would 
raise the price of a commodity to the extent of four-fifths of the bounty. 

® C. Smith, Three Tracts on the Corn Trade^ 2nd ed., p. 144. 



The en- 
hance- 
ment of 
price 

would en- 
courage 
produc- 
tion if it 
was an 
enhance- 
ment of 
real price, 
but it is 
not; 


it is only 
a degra- 
dation of 
the value 
of silver, 


for corn 
regulates 
the money 
price of 
labour, 


476 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

to educate and bring up their children, and must, so far, tend to 
restrain the population of the country. So far as it operates in the 
other, it must reduce the ability of the employers of the poor, to 
employ so great a number as they otherwise might do, and must, so 
far, tend to restrain the industry of the country. The extraordinary 
exportation of corn, therefore, occasioned by the bounty, not only, 
in every particular year, diminishes the home, just as much as it 
extends the foreign market and consumption, but, by restraining 
the population and industry of the country, its final tendency is to 
stunt and restrain the gradual extension of the home market; and 
thereby, in the long run, rather to diminish, than to augment, the 
whole market and consumption of corn. 

This enhancement of the money price of corn, however, it has 
been thought, by rendering that commodity more profitable to the 
farmer, must necessarily encourage its production.® 

I answer, that this might be the case if the effect of the bounty 
was to raise the real price of corn, or to enable the farmer, with an 
equal quantity of it, to maintain a greater number of labourers in 
the same manner, whether liberal, moderate, or scanty, that other 
labourers are commonly maintained in his neighbourhood. But 
neither the bounty, it is evident, nor any other human institution, 
can have any such effect. It is not the real, but the nominal price 
of corn, which can in any considerable degree be affected by the 
bounty.^® And though the tax which that institution imposes upon 
the whole body of the people, may be very burdensome to those 
who pay it, it is of very little advantage to those who receive it.^^ 
The real effect of the bounty is not so much to raise the real value 
of corn, as to degrade the real value of silver; or to make an equal 
quantity of it exchange for a smaller quantity, not only of corn, but 
of all other home-made commodities: for the money price of corn 
regulates that of all other home-made commodities. 

It regulates the money price of labour, which must always be 
such as to enable the labourer to purchase a quantity of corn suf- 
ficient to maintain him and his family either in the liberal, mod- 
erate, or scanty manner in which the advancing, stationary or de- 

®This and the preceding paragraph are not in eds. i and 2. See above, p. 
474, note 6. 

See above, pp. 30-38. [ft does not occur to Smith that the additional corn 
might require greater labour to produce it than an equal quantity of the old. 

In place of this and the preceding sentence eds. i and 2 read only “It is 
not the real but the nominal price of corn only which can be at all affected by 
the bounty.” The alteration is given in Additions and Corrections. 

“ “Home-made” here and in the line above is not in eds. i and 2. 



BOUNTIES 477 

dining circumstances of the society oblige his employers to main- 
tain him. 

It regulates the money price of all the other parts of the rude 
produce of land, which, in every period of improvement, must bear 
a certain proportion to that of corn, though this proportion is dif- 
ferent in different periods. It regulates, for example, the money 
price of grass and hay, of butcher’s meat, of horses, and the main- 
tenance ot horses, of land carriage consequently, or of the greater 
part of the inland commerce of the country. 

By regulating the money price of all the other parts of the rude 
produce of land, it regulates that of the materials of almost all 
manufactures. By regulating the money price of labour, it regulates 
that of manufacturing art and industry. And by regulating both, it 
regulates that of the complete manufacture. The money price of 
labour, and of every thing that is the produce either of land or 
labour, must necessarily either rise or fall in proportion to the 
money price of corn. 

Though in consequence of the bounty, therefore, the farmer 
should be enabled to sell his corn for four shillings the bushel in- 
stead of three and sixpence, and to pay his landlord a money rent 
proportionable to this rise in the money price of his produce; yet if, 
in consequence of this rise in the price of corn, four shillings will 
purchase no more home-made goods of any other kind than 
three and sixpence would have done before, neither the circum- 
stances of the farmer, nor those of the landlord, will be much 
mended by this change. The farmer will not be able to cultivate 
much better: the landlord will not be able to live much^® better. 
In the purchase of foreign commodities this enhancement in the 
price of corn may give them some little advantage. In that of 
home-made commodities it can give them none at all. And almost 
the whole expence of the farmer, and the far greater part even of 
that of the landlord, is in home-made commodities.^'^ 

That degradation in the value of silver which is the effect of the 
fertility of the mines, and which operates equally, or very near 
equally, through the greater part of the commercial world, is a 
matter of very little consequence to any particular country. The 

“Almost” is not in eds. i and 2 

Eds. I and 2 do not contain “home-made ” 

Eds. I and 2 read “in the smallest degree.” 

Neither “much” is in eds. i and 2. 

This and the two preceding sentences from “in the purchase” appear first 
in Additions and Corrections (which reads “of even” instead of “even of”) 
and ed. 3 


of all rude 
produce, 


and of 
almost all 
manufac- 
tures. 


So farm- 
ers and 
landlords 
are not 
benefited 
by the in- 
creased 
price due 
to the 
bounty, 


A world- 
wide 
degrada- 
tion of the 
value of 



silver is 
of little 
conse- 
quence, 

but degra- 
dation 
confined 
to one 
country 
discour- 
ages the 
industry 
of that 
country. 


In Spain 
and Por- 
ugal gold 
and silver 
are natur- 
ally 

cheaper 
than in 
the rest 
of 

Europe, 


but by 
the hind- 
rances to 
exporta- 
tion they 
are made 
still 

cheaper. 


47S THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

consequent rise of all money prices, though it does not make those 
who receive them really richer, does not make them really poorer. 
A service of plate becomes really cheaper, and every thing else 
remains precisely of the same real value as before. 

But that degradation in the value of silver which, being the effect 
either of the peculiar situation, or of the political institutions of a 
particular country, takes place only in that country, is a matter of 
very great consequence, which, far from tending to make any body 
really richer, tends to make every body really poorer. The rise in 
the money price of all commodities, which is in this case peculiar 
to that country, tends to discourage more or less every sort of in- 
dustry which is carried on within it, and to enable foreign nations, 
by furnishing almost all sorts of goods for a smaller quantity of 
silver than its own workmen can afford to do, to undersell them, not 
only in the foreign, but even in the home market. 

It is the peculiar situation of Spain and Portugal as proprietors 
of the mines, to be the distributors of gold and silver to all the 
other countries of Europe. Those metals ought naturally, there- 
fore, to be somewhat cheaper in Spain and Portugal than in any 
other part of Europe. The difference, however, should be no more 
than the amount of the freight and insurance; and, on account of 
the great value and small bulk of those metals, their freight is no 
great matter, and their insurance is the same as that of any other 
goods of equal value. Spain and Portugal, therefore, could suffer 
very little from their peculiar situation, if they did not aggravate its 
disadvantages by their political institutions. 

Spain by taxing, and Portugal by prohibiting the exportation of 
gold and silver, load that exportation with the expence of smug- 
gling, and raise the value of those metals in other countries so 
much more above what it is in their own, by the whole amount of 
this expence.^® When you dam up a stream of water, as soon as the 
dam is full, as much water must run over the dam-head as if there 
was no dam at all. The prohibition of exportation cannot detain a 
greater quantity of gold and silver in Spain and Portugal than 
what they can afford to employ, than what the annual produce of 
their land and labour will allow them to employ, in coin, plate, 
gilding, and other ornaments of gold and silver. When they have 
got this quantity the dam is full, and the whole stream which flows 
in afterwards must run over. The annual exportation of gold and 

“ Spain’s prohibition of exportation of gold and silver had only been abol- 
ished at a recent period. The tax was 3 per cent, till 1768, then 4 per cent. See 
Raynal, Histoire pklosophique, Amsterdam ed 1773, tom iii , pp. 290, 291. 
As to the export of gold from Portugal, see below, p. 513, note 3. 



BOUNTIES 479 

silver from Spain and Portugal accordingly is, by all accounts, not- 
withstanding these restraints, very near equal to the whole annual 
importation. As the water, however, must always be deeper behind 
the dam-head than before it, so the quantity of gold and silver 
which these restraints detain in Spain and Portugal must, in pro- 
portion to the annual produce of their land and labour, be greater 
than what is to be found in other countries. The higher and 
stronger the dam-head, the greater must be the difference in the 
depth of water behind and before it. The higher the tax, the higher 
the penalties with which the prohibition is guarded, the more vig- 
ilant and severe the police which looks after the execution of the 
law, the greater must be the difference in the proportion of gold and 
silver to the annual produce of the land and labour of Spain and 
Portugal, and to that of other countries. It is said accordingly to 
be very considerable, and that you frequently find there a profu- 
sion of plate in houses, where there is nothing else which would, in 
other countries, be thought suitable or correspondent to this sort of 
magnificence. The cheapness of gold and silver, or what is the same 
thing, the dearness of all commodities, which is the necessary effect 
of this redundancy of the precious metals, discourages both the and agri- 
agriculture and manufactures of Spain and Portugal, and enables 
foreign nations to supply them with many sorts of rude, and with manufac- 
almost all sorts of manufactured produce, for a smaller quantity of tures are 
gold and silver than what they themselves can either raise or make discour- 
them for at home. The tax and prohibition operate in two different aged, 
ways. They not only lower very much the value of the precious 
metals in Spain and Portugal, but by detaining there a certain 
quantity of those metals which would otherwise flow over other 
countries, they keep up their value in those other countries some- 
what above what it otherwise would be, and thereby give those 
countries a double advantage in their commerce with Spain and 
Portugal. Open the flood-gates, and there will presently be less 
water above, and more below, the dam -head, and it will soon come 
to a level in both places. Remove the tax and the prohibition, and 
as the quantity of gold and silver will diminish considerably in 
Spain and Portugal, so it will increase somewhat in other coun- 
tries, and the value of those metals, their proportion to the annual 
produce of land and labour, will soon come to a level, or very near 
to a level, in all. The loss which Spain and Portugal could sustain 
by this exportation of their gold and silver would be altogether nom- 
inal and imaginary. The nominal value of their goods, and of the 
annual produce of their land and labour, would fall, and would be 
expressed or represented by a smaller quantity of silver than be- 



48o XHE wealth OF NATIONS 

fore: but their real value would be the same as before, and would 
be sufficient to maintain, command, and employ, the same quan- 
tity of labour. As the nominal value of their goods would fall, the 
real value of what remained of their gold and silver would rise, and 
a smaller quantity of those metals would answer all the same pur- 
poses of commerce and circulation which had employed a greater 
quantity before. The gold and silver which would go abroad would 
not go abroad for nothing, but would bring back an equal value of 
goods of some kind or another. Those goods too would not be all 
matters of mere luxury and expence, to be consumed by idle people 
who produce nothing in return for their consumption. As the real 
wealtih and revenue of idle people would not be augmented by this 
extraordinary exportation of gold and silver, so neither would their 
consumption be much augmented by it. Those goods would, prob- 
ably, the greater part of them, and certainly some part of them, 
consist in materials, tools, and provisions, for the employment and 
maintenance of industrious people, who would reproduce, with a 
profit, the full value of their consumption. A part of the dead stock 
of the society would thus be turned into active stock, and would 
put into motion a greater quantity of industry than had been em- 
ployed before. The annual produce of their land and labour would 
immediately be augmented a little, and in a few years would, prob- 
ably, be augmented a great deal; their industry being thus relieved 
from one of the most oppressive burdens which it at present labours 
under. 

The corn The bounty upon the exportation of corn necessarily operates 
acte fo^the absurd policy of Spain and Portu- 

game gab TOatever be the actual state of tillage, it renders our corn 
way; somewhat dearer in the home market than it otherwise would be in 
that state, and somewhat cheaper in the foreign; and as the aver- 
age money price of corn regulates more or less that of all other 
commodities, it lowers the value of silver considerably in the one, 
and tends to raise it a little in the other. It enables foreigners, the 
Dutch in particular, not only to eat our corn cheaper than they 
otherwise could do, but sometimes to eat it cheaper than even our 
own people can do upon the same occasions; as we are assured by 
an excellent authority, that of Sir Matthew Decker.^® It hinders 
our own workmen from furnishing their goods for so small a quan- 
tity of silver as they otherwise might do; and enables the Dutch to 
furnish their^s for a smaller. It tends to render our manufactures 

^ Essay on the Carnes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, consequentl of 
the Value of the Lands of Britain, and on the means to restore both, 2nd d , 
1750, pp. 55 , 171 



BOUNTIES 48x 

somewhat dearer in every market, and their’s somewhat cheaper 
than they otherwise would be, and consequently to give their in- 
dustry a double advantage over our own. 

The bounty, as it raises in the home market, not so much the 
real, as the nominal price of our corn, as it augments, not the 
quantity of labour which a certain quantity of corn can maintain 
and employ, but only the quantity of silver which it will exchange 
for, it discourages our manufactures, without rendering any con- 
siderable service either to our farmers or country gentlemen. It 
puts, indeed, a little more money into the pockets of both, and it 
will perhaps be somewhat difficult to persuade the greater part of 
them that this is not rendering them a very considerable service.^^ 
But if this money sinks in its value, in the quantity of labour, pro- 
visions, and home-made commodities of all different kinds which 
it is capable of purchasing, as much as it rises in its quantity, the 
service will be little more than nominal and imaginary. 

There is, perhaps, but one set of men in the whole common- 
wealth to whom the bounty either was or could be essentially ser- 
viceable.^'’ These were the corn merchants, the exporters and im- 
porters of corn. In years of plenty the bounty necessarily occasioned 
a greater exportation than would otherwise have taken place; and 
by hindering the plenty of one year from relieving the scarcity of 
another, it occasioned in years of scarcity a greater importation 
than would otherwise have been necessary. It increased the busi- 
ness of the corn merchant in both; and in years of scarcity, it not 
only enabled him to import a greater quantity, but to sell it for a 
better price, and consequently with a greater profit than he could 
otherwise have made, if the plenty of one year had not been more 
or less hindered from relieving the scarcity of another. It is in this 
set of men, accordingly, that I have observed the greatest zeal for 
the continuance or renewal of the bounty. 

Our country gentlemen, when they imposed the high duties upon 
the importation of foreign corn, which in times of moderate plenty 
amount to a prohibition, and when they established the bounty, 
seem to have imitated the conduct of our manufacturers. By the one 
institution, they secured to themselves the monopoly of the home 
market, and by the other they endeavoured to prevent that market 
from ever being overstocked with their commodity. By both they 

^ Eds. I and 2 read “not the real but only the nominal price.” 

^ Eds. I and 2 read “the smallest real service.” 

Eds I and 2 read “a very real service ” 

^ “Home-made” is not in eds i and 2. 

Eds. I and 2 read “will be merely nominal.” 

Eds. I and 2 read “could be really serviceable.” 


it discour 
ages 

manufac- 
tures 
without 
much 
benefiting 
farmers 
and coun 
try 

gentle- 

men 


It is es- 
sentially 
service- 
able only 
to the 
com mer- 
chants. 


The coun- 
try 

gentle- 
men 
estab- 
lished the 
duties on 
the im- 
portation 



of corn, 
and the 
bounty, in 
imitation 
of the 
manufac- 
turers, 

without 
attending 
to the es- 
sential 
difference 
between 
com and 
other 
goods. 


All the ex- 
pedients 


482 the wealth of nations 

endeavoured to raise its real value, in the same manner as our 
manufacturers had, by the like institutions, raised the real value of 
many different sorts of manufactured goods. They did not perhaps 
attend to the great and essential difference which nature has es- 
tablished between corn and almost every other sort of goods. When, 
either by the monopoly of the home market, or by a bounty upon 
exportation, you enable our woollen or linen manufacturers to sell 
their goods for somewhat a better price than they otherwise could 
get for them, you raise, not only the nominal, but the real price of 
those goods. You render them equivalent to a greater quantity of 
labour and subsistence, you increase not only the nominal, but the 
real profit, the real wealth and revenue of those manufacturers, and 
you enable them either to live better themselves, or to employ a 
greater quantity of labour in those particular manufactures. You 
really encourage those manufactures, and direct towards them a 
greater quantity of the industry of the country, than what would 
probably go to them of its own accord. But when by the like insti- 
tutions you raise the nominal or money-price* of corn, you do not 
raise its real value. You do not increase the real wealth, the real 
revenue either of our farmers or country gentlemen. You do not 
encourage the growth of com, because you do not enable them to 
maintain and employ more labourers in raising it. The nature of 
things has stamped upon corn a real value which cannot be altered 
by merely altering its money price.^® No bounty upon exportation, 
no monopoly of the home market, can raise that value,^^ The freest 
competition cannot lower it. Through the world in general that 
value is equal to the quantity of labour which it can maintain, and 
in every particular place it is equal to the quantity of labour which 
it can maintain in the way, whether liberal, moderate, or scanty, in 
which labour is commonly maintained in that place. Woollen or 
linen cloth are not the regulating commodities by which the real 
value of all other commodities must be finally measured and de- 
termined; corn is. The real value of every other commodity is final- 
ly measured and determined by the proportion which its average 
money price bears to the average money price of corn. The real 
value of corn does not vary with those variations in its average 
money price, which sometimes occur from one century to another. 
It is the real value of silver which varies with them. 

Bounties upon the exportation of any home-made commodity are 
liable, first, to that general objection which may be made to all the 

^ Eds. I and 2 read real value which no human institution can alter.” 
Cp. p. 476. 

^ Ed. I reads “raise it.” 



BOUNTIES 4S3 

different expedients of the mercantile system; the objection of forc- 
ing some part of the industry of the country into a channel less ad- 
vantageous than that in which it would run of its own accord: and, 
secondly, to the particular objection of forcing it, not only into a 
channel that is less advantageous, but into one that is actually dis- 
advantageous ; the trade which cannot be carried on but by means 
of a bounty being necessarily a losing trade. The bounty upon the 
exportation of corn is liable to this further objection, that it can in 
no respect promote the raising of that particular commodity of 
which it was meant to encourage the production. When our country 
gentlemen, therefore, demanded the establishment of the bounty, 
though they acted in imitation of our merchants and manufactur- 
ers, they did not act with that complete comprehension of their 
own interest which commonly directs the conduct of those two other 
orders of people. They loaded the public revenue with a very con- 
siderable expence; they imposed a very heavy tax upon the whole 
body of the people; but they did not, in any sensible degree, in- 
crease the real value of their own commodity; and by lowering 
somewhat the real value of silver, they discouraged, in some de- 
gree, the general industry of the country, and, instead of advancing, 
retarded more or less the improvement of their own lands, which 
necessarily depends upon the general industry of the country. 

To encourage the production of any commodity, a bounty upon 
production, one should imagine, would have a more direct opera- 
tion, than one upon exportation. It would, besides, impose only one 
tax upon the people, that which they must contribute in order to 
pay the bounty. Instead of raising, it would tend to lower the price 
of the commodity in the home market; and thereby, instead of im- 
posing a second tax upon the people, it might, at least in part, repay 
them for what they had contributed to the first. Bounties upon pro- 
duction, however, have been very rarely granted.^^ The prejudices 
established by the commercial system have taught us to believe, 
that national wealth arises more immediately from exportation than 
from production. It has been more favoured accordingly, as the 
more immediate means of bringing money into the country. Boun- 
ties upon production, it has been said too, have been found by ex- 
perience more liable to frauds than those upon exportation. How 
far this is true, I know not. That bounties upon exportation have 

® Eds. I and 2 read “They loaded the public revenue with a very consid- 
erable expence, but they did not in any respect increase.” The alteration is 
given in Additions and Corrections. 

®In place of this and the two preceding sentences (beginning “It would 
besides”) eds. i and 2 read only “It has, however, been more rarely granted.” 
The alteration is given in Additions and Corrections. 


of the 
mercan- 
tile sys- 
tem force 
industry 
into less 
advanta- 
geous 
channels: 
bounties 
on ex- 
ports 
force it 
into ac- 
tually dis- 
advanta- 
geous 
channels: 
the 

bounty on 
corn does 
not en- 
courage 
its pro- 
duction. 


A bounty 
on pro- 
duction 
would be 
more ef- 
fectual 
than one 
on ex- 
portation 
and 
would 
lower the 
price of 
the com- 
modity, 

but such 
bounties 
have been 
rare, 



owing to 
the inter- 
est of 
merchants 
and 

manufac- 

turers. 


The her- 
ring and 
whale 
fishery 
bounties 
are in part 
given on 
produc- 
tion. 


They are 
supposed 
to aug- 
ment the 
number 
of sailors 
and ships. 


484 the wealth of HATION£j 

been abused to many fraudulent purposes, is very well known. But 
it is not the interest of merchants and manufacturers, the great in- 
ventors of all these expedients, that the home market should be 
overstocked with their goods, an event which a bounty upon pro- 
duction might sometimes occasion. A bounty upon exportation, by 
enabling them to send abroad the surplus part, and to keep up the 
price of what remains in the home market, effectually prevents this. 
Of all the expedients of the mercantile system, accordingly, it is the 
one of which they are the fondest. I have known the different un- 
dertakers of some particular works agree privately among them- 
selves to give a bounty out of their own pockets upon the exporta- 
tion of a certain proportion of the goods which they dealt in. This 
expedient succeeded so well, that it more than doubled the price of 
their goods in the home market, notwithstanding a very consider- 
able increase in the produce. The operation of the bounty upon 
corn must have been wonderfully different, if it has lowered the 
money price of that commodity. 

Something like a bounty upon production, however, has been 
granted upon some particular occasions. The tonnage bounties 
given to the white-herring and whale-fisheries may, perhaps, be 
considered as somewhat of this nature.^^ They tend directly, it may 
be supposed,®^ to render the goods cheaper in the home market than 
they otherwise would be.^^ In other respects their effects, it must be 
acknowledged,^^ are the same as those of bounties upon exporta- 
tion. By means of them a part of the capital of the country is em- 
ployed in bringing goods to market, of which the price does not re- 
pay the cost, together with the ordinary profits of stock. 

But though the tonnage bounties to those fisheries do not con- 
tribute to the opulence of the nation, it may perhaps be thought 
that they contribute to its defence,^^ by augmenting the number of 
its sailors and shipping. This, it may be alleged, may sometimes be 
done by means of such bounties at a much smaller expence, than 
by keeping up a great standing navy, if I may use such an expres- 
sion,^® in the same way as a standing army.®^ 

^ Eds. I and 2 read “The encouragements given.” 

®^The whale fisheiy bounty under ii Geo III , c. 38, was 40s. per ton for 
the first five years, 30s. for the second five years, and 20s. for the third. 

^ “It may be supposed” is not in eds. i and 2 

Eds. I and 2 read “would be in the actual state of production.” 

“It must be acknowledged” is not in eds i and 2. 

“Tonnage” is not in eds. i and 2 

Eds. I and 2 read “they may perhaps be defended as conducing to its de- 
fence ” 

Eds. I and 2 read “This may frequently be done.” 

Eds I and 2 read “in time of peace” here. 

The next four pages, to page 489 line 17? are not in eds. i and 2, which read 



BOUNTIES 4^5 

Notwithstanding these favourable allegations, however, the fol- 
lowing considerations dispose me to believe, that in granting at 
least one of these bounties, the legislature has been very grossly 
imposed upon. 

First, the herring buss bounty seems too large. 

From the commencement of the winter fishing 1771 to the end 
of the winter fishing 1781, the tonnage bounty upon the herring 
buss fishery has been at thirty shillings the ton. During these eleven 
years the whole number of barrels caught by the herring buss fish- 
ery of Scotland amounted to 373 , 347 - The herrings caught and 
cured at sea, are called sea sticks In order to render them what 
are called merchantable herrings, it is necessary to repack them 
with an additional quantity of salt; and in this case, it is reckoned, 
that three barrels of sea sticks, are usually repacked into two bar- 
rels of merchantable herrings. The number of barrels of merchant- 
able herrings, therefore, caught during these eleven years, will 
amount only, according to this account, to 252,2311. During these 
eleven years the tonnage bounties paid amounted to 155,463/. ii^. 
or to 8^. upon every barrel of sea sticks, and to 12^. 3fc?. 
upon every barrel of merchantable herrings. 

The salt with which these herrings are cured, is sometimes 
Scotch, and sometimes foreign salt; both which are delivered free 
of all excise duty to the fish-curers. The excise duty upon Scotch 
salt is at present is. 6 d. that upon foreign salt lo^. the bushel, A 
barrel of herrings is supposed to require about one bushel and one- 
fourth of a bushel foreign salt. Two bushels are the supposed aver- 
age of Scotch salt. If the herrings are entered for exportation, no 
part of this duty is paid up; if entered for home consumption, 
whether the herrings were cured with foreign or with Scotch salt, 
only one shilling the barrel is paid up. It was the old Scotch duty 
upon a bushel of salt, the quantity which, at a low estimation, had 
been supposed necessary for curing a barrel of herrings. In Scot- 
land, foreign salt is very little used for any other purpose but the 
curing of fish. But from the 5th April 1771, to the 5th April 1782, 

in place of them: “Some other bounties may be vindicated perhaps upon the 
same principle. It is of importance that the kingdom should depend as little 
as possible upon its neighbours for the manufactures necessary for its de- 
fence ; and if these cannot otherwise be maintained at home, it is reasonable 
that all other branches of industry should be taxed in order to support them. 
The bounties upon the importation of naval stores from America, upon British 
made sail-cloth, and upon British made gunpowder, may perhaps all three be 
vindicated upon this principle. The first is a bounty upon the production of 
America, for the use of Great Britain, The two others are bounties upon ex- 
portation.” The new paragraphs, with the two preceding paragraphs as 
amended, are given in Additions and Corrections. 

In Additions and Corrections the term is “seasteeks,” as in the Appendix. 


In grant- 
ing the 
herring 
bounties 
Parlia- 
ment has 
been im- 
posed on, 
since (i) 
the her- 
ring buss 
bounty is 
too large, 



(2) the 
bounty is 
not pro- 
portioned 
to the fish 
caught, 


(3) the 
bounty is 
given to 
busses, 
whereas 
the fishery 
ought to 
be carried 
on by 
boats, 


486 the wealth oe nations 

the quantity of foreign salt imported amounted to 936,974 bushels, 
at eighty-four pounds the bushel: the quantity of Scotch salt de- 
livered from the works to the fish-curers, to no more than 168,226, 
at fifty-six pounds the bushel only. It would appear, therefore, that 
it is principally foreign salt that is used in the fisheries. Upon every 
barrel of herrings exported there is, besides, a bounty of 2s. M. and 
more than two-thirds of the buss caught herrings are exported. Put 
all these things together, and you will find that, during these eleven 
years, every barrel of buss caught herrings, cured with Scotch salt 
when exported, has cost government 17L and when entered 
for home consumption 145. 3fc?.: and that every barrel cured with 
foreign salt, when exported, has cost government iL js. 5|d.; and 
when entered for home consumption iL The price of a bar- 

rel of good merchantable herrings runs from seventeen and eighteen 
to four and five and twenty shillings; about a guinea at an av- 
erage."*^ 

Secondly, the bounty to the white herring fishery is a tonnage 
bounty; and is proportioned to the burden of the ship, not to her 
diligence or success in the fishery; and it has, I am afraid, been 
too common for vessels to fit out for the sole purpose of catching, 
not the fish, but the bounty. In the year 1 7 59, when the bounty was 
at fifty shillings the ton, the whole buss fishery of Scotland brought 
in only four barrels of sea sticks. In that year each barrel of sea 
sticks cost government in bounties alone 113^. 15^.; each barrel of 
merchantable herrings 159/. 75. 6 d. 

Thirdly, the mode of fishing for which this tonnage bounty in the 
white herring fishery has been given (by busses or decked vessels 
from twenty to eighty tons burthen), seems not so well adapted to 
the situation of Scotland as to that of Holland; from the practice of 
which country it appears to have been borrowed. Holland lies at a 
great distance from the seas to which herrings are known principal- 
ly to resort; and can, therefore, carry on that fishery only in decked 
vessels, which can carry water and provisions sufficient for a voy- 
age to a distant sea. But the Hebrides or western islands, the islands 
of Shetland, and the northern and north-western coasts of Scot- 
land, the countries in whose neighbourhood the herring fishery is 
principally carried on, are everywhere intersected by arms of the 
sea, which run up a considerable way into the land, and which, in 
the language of the country, are called sea-lochs. It is to these sea- 
lochs that the herrings principally resort during the seasons in 
which they visit those seas; for the visits of this, and, I am assured, 

^ See the accounts at the end of the volume In Additions and Corrections 
they are printed in the text. 



BOUNTIES 4S7 

of many other sorts of fish, are not quite regular and constant. A 
boat fishery, therefore, seems to be the mode of fishing best adapt- 
ed to the peculiar situation of Scotland: the fishers carrying the 
herrings on shore, as fast as they are taken, to be either cured or 
consumed fresh. But the great encouragement which a bounty of 
thirty shillings the ton gives to the buss fishery, is necessarily a dis- 
couragement to the boat fishery; which, having no such bounty, 
cannot bring its cured fish to market upon the same terms as the 
buss fishery. The boat fishery, accordingly, which, before the estab- 
lishment of the buss bounty, was very considerable, and is said to 
have employed a number of seamen, not inferior to what the buss 
fishery employs at present, is now gone almost entirely to decay. Of 
the former extent, however, of this now ruined and abandoned fish- 
ery, I must acknowledge, that I cannot pretend to speak with much 
precision. As no bounty was paid upon the outfit of the boat-fishery, 
no account was talcen of it by the officers of the customs or salt 
duties. 

Fourthly, in many parts of Scotland, during certain seasons of 
the year, herrings malce no inconsiderable part of the food of the 
common people. A bounty, which tended to lower their price in the 
home market, might contribute a good deal to the relief of a great 
number of our fellow-subjects, whose circumstances are by no 
means affluent. But the herring buss bounty contributes to no such 
good purpose. It has ruined the boat fishery, which is, by far, the 
best adapted for the supply of the home market, and the addi- 
tional bounty of 2^. M. the barrel upon exportation, carries the 
greater part, more than two thirds, of the produce of the buss fish- 
ery abroad. Between thirty and forty years ago, before the estab- 
lishment of the buss bounty, sixteen shillings the barrel, I have been 
assured, was the common price of white herrings. Between ten and 
fifteen years ago, before the boat fishery was entirely ruined, the 
price is said to have run from seventeen to twenty shillings the bar- 
rel. For these last five years, it has, at an average, been at twenty- 
five shillings the barrel. This high price, however, may have been 
owing to the real scarcity of the herrings upon the coast of Scot- 
land. I must observe too, that the cask or barrel, which is usually 
sold with the herrings, and of which the price is included in all the 
foregoing prices, has, since the commencement of the American 
war, risen to about double its former price, or from about three 
shillings to about six shillings. I must likewise observe, that the 
accounts I have received of the prices of former times, have been by 
no means quite uniform and consistent; and an old man of great 
accuracy and experience has assured me, that more than fifty years 


(4) the 
bounty 
has raised, 
or at any 
rate not 
lowered, 
the price 
of her- 
rings. 



Profits in 
the busi- 
ness have 
not been 
high. 


Bounties 

bimanu- 


488 XHE WEALTH OP NATIONS 

agOj a guinea was the usual price of a barrel of good merchantable 
herrings; and this, I imagine, may still be looked upon as the aver- 
age price. All accounts, however, I think, agree, that the price has 
not been lowered in the home market, in consequence of the buss 
bounty. 

When the undertakers of fisheries, after such liberal bounties 
have been bestowed upon them, continue to sell their commodity at 
the same, or even at a higher price than they were accustomed to do 
before, it might be expected that their profits should be very great; 
and it is not improbable that those of some individuals may have 
been so. In general, however, I have every reason to believe, they 
have been quite otherwise. The usual effect of such bounties is to 
encourage rash undertakers to adventure in a business which they 
do not understand, and what they lose by their own negligence and 
ignorance, more than compensates all that they can gain by the ut- 
most liberality of government. In 1750, by the same act which first 
gave the bounty of thirty shillings the ton for the encouragement of 
the white herring fishery (the 23 Geo. II. chap. 24.), a joint stock 
company was erected, with a capital of five hundred thousand 
pounds, to which the subscribers (over and above all other encour- 
agements, the tonnage bounty just now mentioned, the exportation 
bounty of two shillings and eight pence the barrel, the delivery of 
both British and foreign salt duty free) were, during the space of 
fourteen years, for every hundred pounds which they subscribed 
and paid into the stock of the society, entitled to three pounds a 
year, to be paid by the receiver-general of the customs in equal 
half-yearly payments. Besides this great company, the residence of 
whose governor and directors was to be in London, it was declared 
lawful to erect different fishing-chambers in all the different out- 
ports of the kingdom, provided a sum not less than ten thousand 
pounds was subscribed into the capital of each, to be managed at 
its own risk, and for its own profit and loss. The same annuity, and 
the same encouragements of all kinds, were given to the trade of 
those inferior chambers, to that of the great company. The sub- 
scription of the great company was soon filled up, and several dif- 
ferent fishing-chambers were erected in the different out-ports of 
the kingdom. In spite of all these encouragements, almost all those 
different companies, both great and small, lost either the whole, or 
the greater part of their capitals; scarce a vestige now remains of 
any of them, and the white herring fishery is now entirely, or almost 
entirely, carried on by private adventurers. 

If any particular manufacture was necessary, indeed, for the 
defence of the society, it might not always be prudent to depend 



BOUNTIES 489 

upon our neighbours for the supply; and if such manufacture could 
not otherwise be supported at home, it might not be unreasonable 
that all the other branches of industry should be taxed in order to 
support it. The bounties upon the exportation of British-made sail- 
cloth, and British-made gun-powder, may, perhaps, both be vin- 
dicated upon this principle. 

But though it can very seldom be reasonable to tax the industry 
of the great body of the people, in order to support that of some 
particular class of manufacturers; yet in the wantonness of great 
prosperity, when the public enjoys a greater revenue than it knows 
well what to do with, to give such bounties to favourite manufac- 
tures, may, perhaps, be as natural, as to incur any other idle ex- 
pence. In public, as well as in private expences, great wealth may, 
perhaps, frequently be admitted as an apology for great folly. But 
there must surely be something more than ordinary absurdity, in 
continuing such profusion in times of general difficulty and dis- 
tress.'^^ 

What is called a bounty is sometimes no more than a drawback, 
and consequently is not liable to the same objections as what is 
properly a bounty. The bounty, for example, upon refined sugar 
exported, may be considered as a drawback of the duties upon the 
brown and muscovado sugars from which it is made. The bounty 
upon wrought silk exported, a drawback of the duties upon raw and 
thrown silk imported. The bounty upon gunpowder exported, a 
drawback of the duties upon brimstone and saltpetre imported. In 
the language of the customs those allowances only are called draw- 
backs, which are given upon goods exported in the same form in 
which they are imported. When that form has been so altered by 
manufacture of any kind, as to come under a new denomination, 
they are called bounties.^® 

Premiums given by the public to artists and manufacturers who 
excel in their particular occupations, are not liable to the same 
objections as bounties. By encouraging extraordinary dexterity and 
ingenuity, they serve to keep up the emulation of the workmen 
actually employed in those respective occupations, and are not con- 
siderable enough to turn towards any one of them a greater share 
of the capital of the country than what would go to it of its own 
accord. Their tendency is not to overturn the natural balance of 
employments, but to render the work which is done in each as per- 


factures 
necessary 
for the 
defence 
of the 
country 
are not 
unreason- 
able 

It is less 
absurd to 
give 
bounties 
in times 
of pros- 
perity 
than in 
times of 
distress 


Some al- 
lowances 
called 
bounties 
are, prop- 
erly 

speaking, 

draw- 

backs. 


Prizesto 
successful 
artists and 
manufac- 
turers do 
not divert 
industry 
to less 
advanta- 
geous 
channels, 
but en- 


The ten paragraphs ending here are not in eds. i and 2. See above, p. 484, 
note 39, 

Eds. I and 2 read “When that form has been altered by manufacture of 
any kind, they are called bounties.” 



courage 

perfec- 

tion. 


The com 
bounty 
and corn 
laws are 
undeserv- 
ing of 
praise 


There are 
four 

branches 
of the 
corn 
trade: 


I The In- 
land Deal- 
er, whose 
interest 
is the 
same as 
that of 
the 

people, 
^;iz.,that 
the con- 
sumption 
should be 
propor- 
tioned to 
the supply 
available. 


490 the wealth of NATIONS 

feet and complete as possible. The expence of premiums, besides, is 
very trifling; that of bounties very great. The bounty upon corn 
alone has sometimes cost the public in one year more than three 
hundred thousand pounds.^^ 

Bounties are sometimes called premiums, as drawbacks are some- 
times called bounties. But we must in all cases attend to the nature 
of the thing, without paying any regard to the word. 


Digression concerning the Corn Trade and Corn Laws 

I CANNOT conclude this chapter concerning bounties, without ob- 
serving that the praises which have been bestowed upon the law 
which establishes the bounty upon the exportation of corn, and 
upon that system of regulations which is connected with it, are 
altogether unmerited. A particular examination of the nature of the 
corn trade, and of the principal British laws which relate to it, will 
sufficiently demonstrate the truth of this assertion. The great im- 
portance of this subject must justify the length of the digression. 

The trade of the corn merchant is composed of four different 
branches, which, though they may sometimes be all carried on by 
the same person, are in their own nature four separate and distinct 
trades. These are, first, the trade of the inland dealer; secondly, 
that of the merchant importer for home consumption; thirdly, that 
of the merchant exporter of home produce for foreign consumption; 
and, fourthly, that of the merchant carrier, or of the importer of 
corn in order to export it again. 

I. The interest of the inland dealer, and that of the great body 
of the people, how opposite soever they may at first sight appear, 
are, even in years of the greatest scarcity, exactly the same. It is his 
interest to raise the price of his corn as high as the real scarcity of 
the season requires, and it can never be his interest to raise it high- 
er. By raising the price he discourages the consumption, and puts 
every body more or less, but particularly the inferior ranks of peo- 
ple, upon thrift and good management. If, by raising it too high, 
he discourages the consumption so much that the supply of the 
season is likely to go beyond the consumption of the season, and to 
last for some time after the next crop begins to come in, he runs the 
hazard, not only of losing a considerable part of his corn by natural 
causes, but of being obliged to sell what remains of it for much less 
than what he might have had for it several months before. If by 
not raising the price high enough he discourages the consumption 


"Above, vol. i , p. 199. 


^®This heading is not in ed i. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 49i 

SO little, that the supply of the season is likely to fall short of the 
consumption of the season, he not only loses a part of the profit 
which he might otherwise have made, but he exposes the people to 
suffer before the end of the season, instead of the hardships of a 
dearth, the dreadful horrors of a famine. It is the interest of the 
people that their daily, weekly, and monthly consumption, should 
be proportioned as exactly as possible to the supply of the season. 

The interest of the inland corn dealer is the same. By supplying 
them, as nearly as he can judge, in this proportion, he is likely to 
sell all his corn for the highest price, and with the greatest profit; 
and his knowledge of the state of the crop, and of his daily, weekly, 
and monthly sales, enable him to judge, with more or less accur- 
acy, how far they really are supplied in this manner. Without in- 
tending the interest of the people, he is necessarily led, by a regard 
to his own interest, to treat them, even in years of scarcity, pretty 
much in the same manner as the prudent master of a vessel is some- 
times obliged to treat his crew. When he foresees that provisions are 
likely to run short, he puts them upon short allowance. Though 
from excess of caution he should sometimes do this without any 
real necessity, yet all the inconveniencies which his crew can 
thereby suffer are inconsiderable, in comparison of the danger, mis- 
ery, and ruin, to which they might sometimes be exposed by a less 
provident conduct. Though from excess of avarice, in the same 
manner, the inland corn merchant should sometimes raise the price 
of his corn somewhat higher than the scarcity of the season re- 
quires, yet all the inconveniencies which the people can suffer from 
this conduct, which effectually secures them from a famine in the 
end of the season, are inconsiderable, in comparison of what they 
might have been exposed to by a more liberal way of dealing in the 
beginning of it. The corn merchant himself is likely to suffer the 
most by this excess of avarice; not only from the indignation which 
it generally excites against him, but, though he should escape the 
effects of this indignation, from the quantity of corn which it neces- 
sarily leaves upon his hands in the end of the season, and which, 
if the next season happens to prove favourable, he must always sell 
for a much lower price than he might otherwise have had. 

Were it possible, indeed, for one great company of merchants to Theinter- 
possess themselves of the whole crop of an extensive country, it 
might, perhaps, be their interest to deal with it as the Dutch are poiy 

said to do with the spicferies of the Moluccas, to destroy or throw might 

away a considerable part of it, in order to keep up the price of the 

Not a misprint for “enables ” There are two knowledges, one of the state 
of the crop and the other of the daily sales. 



destroy a 
portion of 
the crop, 
but corn 
cannot be 
monopo- 
lised 

where the 
trade is 
free. 


Dearths 
are never 
occa- 
sioned by 
combina- 
tion, but 
always by 
scarcity, 
and fa- 
mines are 
always 
caused by 


492 the wealth of nations 

rest.^'^ But it is scarce possible, even by the violence of law, to 
establish such an extensive monopoly with regard to corn; and, 
wherever the law leaves the trade free, it is of all commodities the 
least liable to be engrossed or monopolized by the force of a few 
large capitals, which buy up the greater part of it. Not only its 
value far exceeds what the capitals of a few private men are cap- 
able of purchasing, but supposing they were capable of purchasing 
it, the manner in which it is produced renders this purchase alto- 
gether impracticable. As in every civilized country it is the com- 
modity of which the annual consumption is the greatest, so a great- 
er quantity of industry is annually employed in producing corn 
than in producing any other commodity. When it first comes from 
the ground too, it is necessarily divided among a greater number of 
owners than any other commodity; and these owners can never be 
collected into one place like a number of independent manufactur- 
ers, but are necessarily scattered through all the different corners of 
the country. These first owners either immediately supply the con- 
sumers in their own neighbourhood, or they supply other inland 
dealers who supply those consumers. The inland dealers in corn, 
therefore, including both the farmer and the baker, are necessarily 
more numerous than the dealers in any other commodity, and their 
dispersed situation renders it altogether impossible for them to en- 
ter into any general combination. If in a year of scarcity therefore, 
any of them should find that he had a good deal more corn upon 
hand than, at the current price he could hope to dispose of before 
the end of the season, he would never think of keeping up this price 
to his own loss, and to the sole benefit of his rivals and competitors, 
but would immediately lower it, in order to get rid of his corn be- 
fore the new crop began to come in. The same motives, the same 
interests, which would thus regulate the conduct of any one dealer, 
would regulate that of every other, and oblige them all in general to 
sell their corn at a price which, according to the best of their judg- 
ment, was most suitable to the scarcity or plenty of the season. 

Whoever examines, with attention, lie history of the dearths and 
famines which have afflicted any part of Europe, during either the 
course of the present or that of the two preceding centuries, of sev- 
eral of which we have pretty exact accounts, will find, I believe, 
that a dearth never has arisen from any combination among the 
inland dealers in corn, nor from any other cause but a real scarcity, 
occasioned sometimes, perhaps, and in some particular places, by 
the waste of war, but in by far the greatest number of cases, by the 
fault of the seasons; and that a famine has never arisen from any 

Above, p. 158; below, p. 600. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 493 

other cause but the violence of government attempting, by improp- 
er means, to remedy the inconveniencies of a dearth. 

In an extensive corn country, between all the different parts of 
which there is a free commerce and communication, the scarcity oc- 
casioned by the most unfavourable seasons can never be so great as 
to produce a famine; and the scantiest crop, if managed with fru- 
gality and oeconomy, will maintain, through the year, the same 
number of people that are commonly fed in a more affluent manner 
by one of moderate plenty. The seasons most unfavourable to the 
crop are those of excessive drought or excessive rain. But, as corn 
grows equally upon high and low lands, upon grounds that are dis- 
posed to be too wet, and upon those that are disposed to be too dry, 
either the drought or the rain which is hurtful to one part of the 
country is favourable to another; and though both in the wet and 
in the dry season the crop is a good deal less than in one more prop- 
erly tempered, yet in both what is lost in one part of the country is 
in some measure compensated by what is gained in the other. In 
rice countries, where the crop not only requires a very moist soil, 
but where in a certain period of its growing it must be laid under 
water, the effects of a drought are much more dismal. Even in such 
countries, however, the drought is, perhaps, scarce ever so univer- 
sal, as necessarily to occasion a famine, if the government would 
allow a free trade. The drought in Bengal, a few years ago, might 
probably have occasioned a very great dearth. Some improper regu- 
lations, some injudicious restraints imposed by the servants of the 
East India Company upon the rice trade, contributed, perhaps, to 
turn that dearth into a famine. 

When the government, in order to remedy the inconveniencies of 
dearth, orders all the dealers to sell their corn at what it supposes 
a reasonable price, it either hinders them from bringing it to mar- 
ket, which may sometimes produce a famine even in the beginning 
of the season; or if they bring it thither, it enables the people, and 
thereby encourages them to consume it so fast, as must necessarily 
produce a famine before the end of the season. The unlimited, un- 
restrained freedom of the corn trade, as it is the only effectual pre- 
ventative of the miseries of a famine, so it is the best palliative of 
the inconveniencies of a dearth; for the inconveniencies of a real 
scarcity cannot be remedied; they can only be palliated. No trade 
deserves more the full protection of the law, and no trade requires 
it so much ; because no trade is so much exposed to popular odium. 

In years of scarcity, the inferior ranks of people impute their 
distress to the avarice of the corn merchant, who becomes the ob- 
ject of their hatred and indignation. Instead of making profit upon 


the sup- 
posed 
remedies 
for 

dearths 
applied by 
govern- 
ment 

Scarcities 
are never 
great 
enough 
to cause 
famine 


Govern- 
ments 
cause 
famines 
by order- 
ing corn 
to be sold 
at a rea- 
sonable 
price. 


The corn 
merchant 
is odious 



to the 
populace, 


and this 
deters re- 
spectable 
people 
from en- 
tering the 
trade. 


This 
popular 
odium 
was en- 
couraged 
by legis- 
lation. 


Many re- 
straints 


494 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

such occasions, therefore, he is often in danger of 'being utterly 
ruined, and of having his magazines plundered and destroyed by 
their violence. It is in years of scarcity, however, when prices are 
high, that the corn merchant expects to make his principal profit. 
He is generally in contract with some farmers to furnish him for a 
certain number of years with a certain quantity of corn at a certain 
price. This contract price is settled according to what is supposed to 
be the moderate and reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average 
price, which, before the late years of scarcity, was commonly about 
eight-and-twenty shillings for the quarter of wheat, and for that of 
other grain in proportion. In years of scarcity, therefore, the corn 
merchant buys a great part of his corn for the ordinary price, and 
sells it for a much higher. That this extraordinary profit, however, is 
no more than sufficient to put his trade upon a fair level with other 
trades, and to compensate the many losses which he sustains upon 
other occasions, both from the perishable nature of the commodity 
itself, and from the frequent and unforeseen fluctuations of its 
price, seems evident enough, from this single circumstance, that 
great fortunes are as seldom made in this as in any other trade. 
The popular odium, however, which attends it in years of scarcity, 
the only years in which it can be very profitable, renders people of 
character and fortune averse to enter into it. It is abandoned to an 
inferior set of dealers; and millers, bakers, mealmen, and meal fac- 
tors, together with a number of wretched hucksters, are almost the 
only middle people that, in the home market, come between the 
grower and the consumer. 

The ancient policy of Europe, instead of discountenancing this 
popular odium against a trade so beneficial to the public, seems, or* 
the contrary, to have authorised and encouraged it. 

By the 5th and 6th of Edward VI. cap. 14. it was enacted. That 
whoever should buy any corn or grain with intent to sell it again, 
should be reputed an unlawful engrosser, and should, for the first 
fault suffer two months imprisonment, and forfeit the value of the 
corn; for the second, suffer six months imprisonment, and forfeit 
double the value; and for the third, be set in the pillory, suffer im- 
prisonment during the king^s pleasure, and forfeit all his goods and 
chattels. The ancient policy of most other parts of Europe was no 
better than that of England. 

Our ancestors seem to have imagined that the people would buy 
their com cheaper of the farmer than of the corn merchant, who, 

^ “Any corn growing in the fields, or any other corn or grain, butter, cheese, 
fish or other dead victuals whatsoever.” But grain was exempted when below 
certain prices, e.g., wheat, 6s. 8d. the quarter. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 495 

they were afraid, would require, over and above the price which he 
paid to the farmer, an exorbitant profit to himself. They endeavour- 
ed, therefore, to annihilate his trade altogether. They even endeav- 
oured to hinder as much as possible any middle man of any kind 
from coming in between the grower and the consumer; and this 
was the 'meaning of the many restraints which they imposed upon 
the trade of those whom they called kidders or carriers of corn, a 
trade which nobody was allowed to exercise without a licence as- 
certaining his qualifications as a man of probity and fair dealing.^^ 
The authority of three justices of the peace was, by the statute of 
Edward VI. necesspy, in order to grant this licence. But even this 
restraint was afterwards thought insufficient, and by a statute of 
Elizabeth,^^ the privilege of granting it was confined to the quarter- 
sessions. 

The ancient policy of Europe endeavoured in this manner to reg- 
ulate agriculture, the great trade of the country, by maxims quite 
different from those which it established with regard to manufac- 
tures, the great trade of the towns. By leaving the farmer no other 
customers but either the consumers or their immediate factors,®^ 
the kidders and carriers of corn, it endeavoured to force him to ex- 
ercise the trade, not only of a farmer, but of a corn merchant or 
corn retailer. On the contrary, it in many cases prohibited the man- 
ufacturer from exercising the trade of a shopkeeper, or from selling 
his own goods by retail. It meant by the one law to promote the 
general interest of the country, or to render corn cheap, without, 
perhaps, its being well understood how this was to be done. By the 
other it meant to promote that of a particular order of men, the 
shopkeepers, who would be so much undersold by the manufac- 
turer, it was supposed, that their trade would be ruined if he was 
allowed to retail at all. 

The manufacturer, however, though he had been allowed to keep 
a shop, and to sell his own goods by retail, could not have under- 
sold the common shopkeeper. Whatever part of his capital he might 
have placed in his shop, he must have withdrawn it from his manu- 


This and the preceding sentence are misleading. The effect of the provi- 
sions quoted in the preceding paragraph would have been to “annihilate alto- 
gether” the trade of the corn merchant if they had been left unqualified. To 
avoid this consequence S and 6 Ed. VI., c. 14, § 7, provides that badgers, 
laders, kidders or carriers may be licensed to buy corn with the intent to sell 
it again in certain circumstances. So that the licensing of kidders was a con- 
siderable alleviation, not, as the text suggests, an aggravation. 

Eliz., c. 12, § 4. 

“Ed. I reads “the consumer or his immediate factors.” It should be no- 
ticed that under 5 and 6 Edward VI., c. 14, § 7, the kidder might sell in “open 
fair or market” as well as to consumers privately. 


were im- 
posed on 
traders. 


Endeav- 
ours were 
made to 
force the 
farmers to 
be retail- 
ers, 

though 
manufac- 
turers 
were for- 
bidden to 
be so. 



The deal- 
er con- 
fined to 
one 

branch of 
business 


496 THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

facture. In order to carry on his business on a level with that of 
other people, as he must have had the profit of a manufacturer on 
the one part, so he must have had that of a shopkeeper upon the 
other. Let us suppose, for example, that in the particular town 
where he lived, ten per cent, was the ordinary profit both of manu- 
facturing and shopkeeping stock; he must in this case have charged 
upon every piece of his own goods which he sold in his shop, a profit 
of twenty per cent. When he carried them from his workhouse to 
his shop, he must have valued them at the price for which he could 
have sold them to a dealer or shopkeeper, who would have bought 
them by wholesale. If he valued them lower, he lost a part of the 
profit of his manufacturing capital. When again he sold them from 
his shop, unless he got the same price at which a shopkeeper would 
have sold them, he lost a part of the profit of his shopkeeping capi- 
tal. Though he might appear, therefore, to make a double profit up- 
on the same piece of goods, yet as these goods made successively a 
part of two distinct capitals, he made but a single profit upon the 
whole capital employed about them; and if he made less than this 
profit, he was a loser, or did not employ his whole capital with the 
same advantage as the greater part of his neighbours. 

What the manufacturer was prohibited to do, the farmer was in 
some measure enjoined to do; to divide his capital between two dif- 
ferent employments; to keep one part of it in his granaries and 
stack yard, for supplying the occasional demands of the market: 
and to employ the other in the cultivation of his land. But as he 
could not afford to employ the latter for less than the ordinary 
profits of farming stock, so he could as little afford to employ the 
former for less than the ordinary profits of mercantile stock. 
Whether the stock which really carried on the business of the corn 
merchant belonged to the person who was called a farmer, or to the 
person who was called a corn merchant, an equal profit was in both 
cases requisite, in order to indemnify its owner for employing it in 
this manner; in order to put his business upon a level with other 
trades, and in order to hinder him from having an interest to change 
it as soon as possible for some other. The farmer, therefore, who 
was thus forced to exercise the trade of a corn merchant, could not 
afford to sell his corn cheaper than any other corn merchant would 
have been obliged to do in the case of a free competition. 

The dealer who can employ his whole stock in one single branch 
of business has an advantage of the same kind with the workman 
who can employ his whole labour in one single operation. As the 
latter acquires a dexterity which enables him, with the same two 
hands, to perform a much greater quantity of work; so the former 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 497 

acquires so easy and ready a method of transacting his business, of 
buying and disposing of his goods, that with the same capital he 
can transact a much greater quantity of business. As the one can 
commonly afford his work a good deal cheaper, so the other can 
commonly afford his goods somewhat cheaper than if his stock and 
attention were both employed about a greater variety of objects. 
The greater part of manufacturers could not afford to retail their 
own goods so cheap as a vigilant and active shopkeeper, whose sole 
business it was to buy them by wholesale, and to retail them again. 
The greater part of farmers could still less afford to retail their own 
corn, to supply the inhabitants of a town, at perhaps four or five 
miles distance from the greater part of them, so cheap as a vigilant 
and active corn merchant, whose sole business it was to purchase 
corn by wholesale, to collect it into a great magazine, and to retail 
it again. 

The law which prohibited the manufacturer from exercising the 
trade of a shopkeeper, endeavoured to force this division in the em- 
ployment of stock to go on faster than it might otherwise have 
done. The law which obliged the farmer to exercise the trade of a 
corn merchant, endeavoured to hinder it from going on so fast. 
Both laws were evident violations of natural liberty, and therefore 
unjust; and they were both too as impolitic as they were unjust. It 
is the interest of every society, that things of this kind should never 
either be forced or obstructed. The man who employs either his la- 
bour or his stock in a greater variety of ways than his situation ren- 
ders necessary, can never hurt his neighbour by underselling him. 
He may hurt himself, and he generally does so. Jack of all trades 
will never be rich, says the proverb. But the law ought always to 
trust people with the care of their own interest, as in their local sit- 
uations they must generally be able to judge better of it than the 
legislator can do. The law, however, which obliged the farmer to ex- 
ercise the trade of a corn merchant, was by far the most pernicious 
of the two. 

It obstructed not only that division in the employment of stock 
which is so advantageous to every society, but it obstructed likewise 
the improvement and cultivation of the land. By obliging the farmer 
to carry on two trades instead of one, it forced him to divide his 
capital into two parts, of which one only could be employed in 
cultivation. But if he had been at liberty to sell his whole crop to 
a corn merchant as fast as he could thresh it out, his whole capital 
might have returned immediately to the land, and have been em- 
ployed in buying more cattle, and hiring more servants, in order to 
improve and cultivate it better. But by being obliged to sell his corn 


can sell 
cheaper 


Laws pre- 
venting 
the manu- 
facturer 
from be- 
ing a 

shopkeep- 
er and 
compel- 
ling the 
farmer to 
be a corn 
merchant 
were both 
impolitic 
and un- 
just, but 
the latter 
was the 
most per- 
nicioub, 


by ob- 
structing 
the im- 
prove- 
ment of 
land. 



Corn mer- 
chants 
support 
che farm- 
ers just 
as whole- 
sale deal- 
ers sup- 
port the 
manufac- 
turers. 

Wholesale 
dealers 
allow 
manufac- 
turers to 
devote 
their 
whole 
capital 
to manu- 
facturing. 


So corn 
merchants 
should al- 
low farm- 
ers to de- 
vote their 
whole 
capital to 
cultiva- 
tion. 


498 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

by retail, he was obliged to keep a great part of his capital in his 
granaries and stack yard through the year, and could not, there- 
fore, cultivate so well as with the same capital he might otherwise 
have done. This law, therefore, necessarily obstructed the improve- 
ment of the land, and, instead of tending to render corn cheaper, 
must have tended to render it scarcer, and therefore dearer, than 
it would otherwise have been. 

After the business of the farmer, that of the corn merchant is in 
reality the trade which, if properly protected and encouraged, 
would contribute the most to the raising of corn. It would support 
the trade of the farmer, in the same manner as the trade of the 
wholesale dealer supports that of the manufacturer. 

The wholesale dealer, by affording a ready market to the manu- 
facturer, by taking his goods off his hands as fast as he can make 
them, and by sometimes even advancing their price to him before 
he has made them, enables him to keep his whole capital, and some- 
times even more than his whole capital, constantly employed in 
manufacturing, and consequently to manufacture a much greater 
quantity of goods than if he was obliged to dispose of them himself 
to the immediate consumers, or even to the retailers. As the capital 
of the wholesale merchant too is generally sufficient to replace that 
of many manufacturers, this intercourse between him and them in- 
terests the owner of a large capital to support the owners of a great 
number of small ones, and to assist them in those losses and mis- 
fortunes which might otherwise prove ruinous to them. 

An intercourse of the same kind universally established between 
the farmers and the corn merchants, would be attended with effects 
equally beneficial to the farmers. They would be enabled to keep 
their whole capitals, and even more than their whole capitals, con- 
stantly employed in cultivation. In case of any of those accidents, 
to which no trade is more liable than theirs, they would find in their 
ordinary customer, the wealthy com merchant, a person who had 
both an interest to support them, and the ability to do it, and they 
would not, as at present, be entirely dependent upon the forbear- 
ance of their landlord, or the mercy of his steward. Were it possible, 
as perhaps it is not, to establish this intercourse universally, and all 
at once, were it possible to turn all at once the whole farming stock 
of the kingdom to its proper business, the cultivation of land, with- 
drawing it from every other employment into which any part of it 
may be at present diverted,^ and were it possible, in order to sup- 
port and assist upon occasion the operations of this great stock, to 
provide all at once another stock almost equally great, it is not per- 
haps very easy to imagine how great, how extensive, and how sud- 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 499 

den would be the improvement which this change of circumstances 
would alone produce upon the whole face of the country. 

The statute of Edward VI.j therefore, by prohibiting as much as 
possible any middle man from coming in between the grower and 
the consumer, endeavoured to annihilate a trade, of which the free 
exercise is not only the best palliative of the inconveniencies of a 
dearth, but the best preventative of that calamity: after the trade 
of the farmer, no trade contributing so much to the growing of corn 
as that of the corn merchant. 

The rigour of this law was afterwards softened by several subse- 
quent statutes, which successively permitted the engrossing of corn 
when the price of wheat should not exceed twenty, twenty-four, 
thirty-two, and forty shillings the quarter .^2 by i-bg j^th of 

Charles 11. c. 7 . the engrossing or buying of corn in order to sell it 
again, as long as the price of wheat did not exceed forty-eight shill- 
ings the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion, was declared 
lawful to all persons not being forestallers, that is, not selling again 
in the same market within three months.®^ All the freedom which 
the trade of the inland corn dealer has ever yet enjoyed, was be- 
stowed upon it by this statute. The statute of the twelfth of the pres- 
ent king, which repeals almost all the other ancient laws against en- 
grossers and forestallers, does not repeal the restrictions of this par- 
ticular statute, which therefore still continue in force.^^ 

This statute, however, authorises in some measure two very ab- 
surd popular prejudices. 

First, it supposes that when the price of wheat has risen so high 
as forty-eight shillings the quarter, and that of other grain in pro- 
portion, corn is IMy to be so engrossed as to hurt the people. But 
from what has been already said, it seems evident enough that corn 
can at no price be so engrossed by the inland dealers as to hurt the 
people: and forty eight shillings the quarter besides, though it may 
be considered as a very high price, yet in years of scarcity it is a 
price which frequently takes place immediately after harvest, when 
scarce any part of the new crop can be sold off, and when it is im- 

'^^DiKgent search has hitherto failed to discover these* statutes. 

§ 4 incorrectly qiloled. The words are “not forestalling nor selling the 
same in the same market within three months.” Under 5 and 6 Ed. VI., c. 14, 
a person buying and selling again “in any fair or market holden or kept in the 
same place or in any other fair or market within four miles” was a regrator, 
while a forestaller was one who bought or contracted to buy things on their 
way to market, or made any motion for enhancing the price of such things or 
preventing them going to market. 

12 Geo. III., c. 71, repeals 5 and 6 Ed. VI., c. 14, but does not mention 15 
Car. II., c. 7, which is purely permissive If 15 Car. II., c. 7, remained of any 
force in this respect it must have been merely in consequence of the common 
law being unfavourable to forestalling. 


Accord- 
ingly the 
statute of 
Edward 
VI. en- 
deavoured 
to anni- 
hilate a 
trade 
which is 
the best 
palliative 
and pre- 
ventative 
of a 
dearth. 

Its pro- 
visions 
were 
moderat- 
ed by 
later stat- 
utes 
down to 
IS Car. 

II, j c. 7) 

which is 
absurd, as 
it sup- 
poses, 

(i) that 

engrossing 

isHkely 

to be 

hurtful 

after a 

certain 

price has 

been 

reached, 



(2) that 
forestall- 
ing IS 
likely to 
be hurtful 
after a 
certain 
price has 
been 
reached. 


The fear 
of en- 
grossing 
and fore- 
stalling is 
as 

ground- 
less as 
that of 
witch- 
craft. 


500 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

possible even for ignorance to suppose that any part of it can be so 
engrossed as to hurt the people. 

Secondly, it supposes that there is a certain price at which corn is 
likely to be forestalled, that is, bought up in order to be sold again 
soon after in the same market, so as to hurt the people. But if a 
merchant ever buys up corn, either going to a particular market or 
in a particular market, in order to sell it again soon after in the 
same market, it must be because he judges that the market cannot 
be so liberally supplied through the whole season as upon that par- 
ticular occasion, and that the price, therefore, must soon rise. If he 
judges wrong in this, and if the price does not rise, he not only loses 
the whole profit of the stock which he employs in this manner, but 
a part of the stock itself, by the expence and loss which necessarily 
attend the storing and keeping of corn. He hurts himself, there- 
fore, much more essentially than he can hurt even the particular 
people whom he may hinder from supplying themselves upon that 
particular market day, because they may afterwards supply them- 
selves just as cheap upon any other market day. If he judges right, 
instead of hurting the great body of the people, he renders them a 
most important service. By making them feel the inconveniencies 
of a dearth somewhat earlier than they otherwise might do, he pre- 
vents their feeling them afterwards so severely as they certainly 
would do, if the cheapness of price encouraged them to consume 
faster than suited the real scarcity of the season. When the scarcity 
is real, the best thing that can be done for the people is to divide 
the inconveniencies of it as equally as possible through all the dif- 
ferent months, and weeks, and days of the year. The interest of 
the corn merchant makes him study to do this as exactly as he can 
and as no other person can have either the same interest, or th- 
same knowledge, or the same abilities to do it so exactly as he, this 
most important operation of commerce ought to be trusted entirely 
to him: or, in other words, the corn trade, so far at least as concerns 
the supply of the home market, ought to be left perfectly free. 

The popular fear of engrossing and forestalling may be compared 
to the popular terrors and suspicions of witchcraft. The unfortunate 
wretches accused of this latter crime were not more innocent of the 
misfortunes imputed to them, than those who have been accused 
of the former. The law which put an end to all prosecutions against 
witchcraft, which put it out of any man’s power to gratify his own 
malice by accusing his neighbour of that imaginary crime, seems ef- 
fectually to have put an end to those fears and suspicions, by tak- 
ing away the great cause which encouraged and supported them. 


“ Eds, I and 2 read “attends.’ 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 50 i 

The law which should restore entire freedom to the inland trade of 
corn, would probably prove as effectual to put an end to the popular 
fears of engrossing and forestalling. 

The 15th of Charles IL c. 7. however, with all its imperfections, 
has perhaps contributed more both to the plentiful supply of the 
home market, and to the increase of tillage, than any other law in 
the statute book. It is from this law that the inland corn trade has 
derived all the liberty and protection which it has ever yet enjoyed; 
and both the supply of the home market, and the interest of tillage, 
are much more effectually promoted by the inland, than either by 
the importation or exportation trade. 

The proportion of the average quantity of all sorts of grain im- 
ported into Great Britain to that of all sorts of grain consumed, it 
has been computed by the author of the tracts upon the corn trade, 
does not exceed that of one to five hundred and seventy. For sup- 
plying the home market, therefore, the importance of the inland 
trade must be to that of the importation trade as five hundred and 
seventy to one.^® 

The average quantity of all sorts of grain exported from Great 
Britain does not, according to the same author, exceed the one-and- 
thirtieth part of the annual produce.^’^ For the encouragement of 
tillage, therefore, by providing a market for the home produce, the 
importance of the inland trade must be to that of the exportation 
trade as thirty to one. 

I have no great faith in political arithmetic, and I mean not to 
warrant the exactness of either of these computations. I mention 
them only in order to show of how much less consequence, in the 
opinion of the most judicious and experienced persons, the foreign 
trade of corn is than the home trade. The great cheapness of corn 
in the years immediately preceding the establishment of the bounty, 
may perhaps, with reason, be ascribed in some measure to the oper- 
ation of this statute of Charles IL, which had been enacted about 
five-and twenty years before, and which had therefore full time to 
produce its effect. 

A very few words will sufficiently explain all that I have to say 
concerning the other three branches of the corn trade. 

IL The trade of the merchant importer of foreign corn for home 
consumption, evidently contributes to the immediate supply of the 
home market, and must so far be immediately beneficial to the 

Charles Smith, Three Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws, 2nd ed., 
1766, p 145. The figures have been already quoted above, p 428 

®"“The export is bare one thirty-second part of the consumption, one 
thirty-third part of the growth exclusive of seed, one thirty-sixth part of the 
growth including the seed.”— p. 144 » quoted above, p. 475. 


Still, the 
IS 

Car II , c 
7, is the 
best of 
the corn 
laws, as it 
gives the 
inland 
corn trade 
all the 
freedom it 
possesses 

The in- 
land 
trade is 
much 
more im- 
portant 
than the 
foreign 


ILThe 

Importer, 

whose 



trade ben- 
efits the 
people 
and does 
not real- 
ly hurt 
the farm- 
ers and 
country 
gentle- 
men. 


The Act 
of 22 Car. 
n,c.i3, 
imposed 
very high 
duties on 
importa- 
tion 


502 the wealth of nations 

great body of the people. It tends, indeed, to lower somewhat the 
average money price of corn, but not to diminish its real value, or 
the quantity of labour which it is capable of maintaining. If impor- 
tation was at all times free, our farmers and country gentlemen 
would, probably, one year with another, get less money for their 
com than they do at present, when importation is at most times in 
effect prohibited; but the money which they got would be of more 
value, would buy more goods of all other kinds, and would employ 
more labour. Their real wealth, their real revenue, therefore, would 
be the same as at present, though it might be expressed by a smaller 
quantity of silver; and they would neither be disabled nor discour- 
aged from cultivating corn as much as they do at present. On the 
contrary, as the rise in the real value of silver, in consequence of 
lowering the money price of corn, lowers somewhat the money price 
of all other commodities, it gives the industry of the country, where 
it takes place, some advantage in all foreign markets, and thereby 
tends to encourage and increase that industry. But the extent of the 
home market for corn must be in proportion to the general industry 
of the country where it grows, or to the number of those who pro- 
duce something else, and therefore have something else, or what 
comes to the same thing, the price of something else, to give in ex- 
change for com. But in every country the home market, as it is the 
nearest and most convenient, so is it likewise the greatest and most 
important market for corn. That rise in the real value of silver, 
therefore, which is the effect of lowering the average money price 
of corn, tends to enlarge the greatest and most important market 
for corn, and thereby to encourage, instead of discouraging, its 
growth. 

By the 2 2d of Charles 11 . c. 13. the importation of wheat, when- 
ever the price in the home market did not exceed fifty-three shill- 
ings and four pence the quarter, was subjected to a duty of sixteen 
shillings the quarter; and to a duty of eight shillings whenever the 
price did not exceed four pounds.^® The former of these two prices 
has, for more than a century past, taken place only in times of very 


“This was not the first law of its kind. 3 Ed. IV., c. 2, was enacted because 
“the labourers and occupiers of husbandry within this realm of England be 
daily grievously endamaged by bringing of corn out of other lands and parts 
into this realm of England when corn of the growing of this realm is at a low 
price,” and forbids importation of wheat when not over 6s. 8d., rye when not 
over 4s. and barley when not over 3s, the quarter. This Act was repealed by 21 
Jac. I., c. 28, and 15 Car. II., c. 7, imposed a duty of ss. 4d on imported 
wheat, 4s. on rye, 2s. 8d. on barley, 2s. on buckwheat, is. 4d. on oats and 4s. 
on pease and beans, when the prices at the port of importation did not exceed 
for wheat, 48s.; barley and buckwheat, 28s.; oats, 13s. 4d.; rye, pease and 
beans, 32s. per quarter. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 503 

great scarcity; and the latter has, so far as I know, not taken place 
at all. Yet, till wheat had risen above this latter price, it was by this 
statute subjected to a very high duty; and, till it had risen above 
the former, to a duty which amounted to a prohibition. The impor- 
tation of other sorts of grain was restrained at rates, and by duties, 
in proportion to the value of the grain, almost equally®® high.®® 
Subsequent laws still further increased those duties. 

Ed. I reads “restrained by duties proportionably.” 

Before the 13th of the present king, the following were the duties payable 
upon the importation of the different sorts of grain: 

Gyaifi, Duties. Duties. Duties. 

Beans to 28s. per qr. 19s. lod. after till 40s. . i6s. 8d. then i2d. 

Barley to 28s. 19s. lod. 32s. . i6s. i2d. 

Malt is prohibited by the annual Malt-tax Bill. 

Oats to 1 6s. 5s. lod. after 9|d. 

Pease to 40s. i6s. od. after qfd. 

Rye to 36s. 19s. lod. till 40s. . i6s. 8d. then i2d. 

Wheat to 44s. 21s. gd. till 535. 4d. . 17s. then 8s. 

till 4I. and after that about is. 4d. 

Buck wheat to 32s. per qr. to pay i6s. 

These different duties were imposed, partly by the 22d of Charles II. in 
place of the Old Subsidy, partly by the New Subsidy, by the One-third and 
Two-thirds Subsidy, and by the Subsidy 1747. The table of duties in this 
note is an exact copy of that in Charles Smith, Three Tracts on the Corn 
Trade, 2nd ed., 1766. p, 83. That author professes to have taken the figures 
from “Mr. Saxby, in his Book of Rates” {i.e., Henry Saxby, The British C«5- 
toms, containing an Historical and Practical Account of each branch of that 
Revenue, 1757, pp. 111-114), but besides rounding off Saxby’s fractions of a 
penny in an inaccurate and inconsistent manner, he has miscopied the second 
duty on barley, the first on pease and the third on wheat. The “Old Subsidy” 
consisted of the $ per cent, or is. poundage imposed by 12 Car. II., c. 4, on 
the values attributed to the various goods by the “Book of Rates” annexed 
to the Act. According to this, imported beans, barley and malt were to be 
rated at 26s. 8d. the quarter when the actual price at the place of importa- 
tion did not exceed 28s. When the actual price was higher than that they were 
to be rated at 5s. the quarter. Oats and pease were to be rated at 4s, the quar- 
ter. Rye when not over 36s. was to be rated at 26s. 8d., and when over that 
price at 5s. Wheat when not over 44s. was to be rated at 40s., and when over 
that price at 6s. 8d. 

So under the Old Subsidy: — 

Beans, barley and malt at prices up to 28s. were to pay is. 4d., and 
when above that price 3d. 

Oats and pease to pay 2-4d. 

Rye up to 36s. to pay is. 4d., and when above, 3d. 

Wheat up to 44s. to pay 2s., and when above, 4d. 

The Act 22 Car. II., c. 13, took off these duties and substituted the follow- 
ing scheme: — 

Beans to 40s. to pay i6s., and above that price, 3d. 

Barley and malt to 32s. to pay i6s., and above, 3d. 

Oats 1 6s. to pay 55. 4d., and above, 2-4d. 

Pease and rye the same as beans. 

Wheat to S3S. 4d. to pay i6s., then to 80s. to pay 8s., and above that 
price, 4d. 

Buckwheat to 32s. to pay i6s. 

But 9 and 10 Will. III., c. 23, imposed a “New Subsidy” exactly equal to 
the Old, so that duties equal to those of 12 Car. II., c. 4, were superimposed 



504 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


but its 
operation 
was gen- 
erally 
suspended 
in years 
of 

scarcity. 

Restraint 
was neces- 
sary on 
account 
of the 
bounty. 


III. The 
Exporter, 
whose 
trade in- 
directly 
contri- 
butes to 
the plen- 
tiful 

supply of 
the home 
market. 


The distress which, in years of scarcity, the strict execution of 
those laws might have brought upon the people, would probably 
have been very great. But, upon such occasions, its execution was 
generally suspended by temporary statutes,®^ which permitted, for 
a limited time, the importation of foreign corn. The necessity of 
these temporary statutes sufficiently demonstrates the impropriety 
of this general one. 

These restraints upon importation, though prior to the establish- 
ment of the bounty, were dictated by the same spirit, by the same 
principles, which afterwards enacted that regulation. How hurtful 
soever in themselves, these or some other restraints upon importa- 
tion became necessary in consequence of that regulation. If, when 
wheat was either below forty-eight shillings the quarter, or not 
much above it, foreign corn could have been imported either duty 
free, or upon paying only a small duty, it might have been exported 
again, with the benefit of the bounty, to the great loss of the public 
revenue, and to the entire perversion of the institution, of which the 
object was to extend the market for the home growth, not that for 
the growth of foreign countries. 

III. The trade of the merchant exporter of corn for foreign con- 
sumption, certainly does not contribute directly to the plentiful 
supply of the home market. It does so, however, indirectly. From 
whatever source this supply may be usually drawn, whether from 
home growth or from foreign importation, unless more corn is either 
usually grown, or usually imported into the country, than what is 
usually consumed in it, the supply of the home market can never be 
very plentiful. But unless the surplus can, in all ordinary cases, be 


on those of 22 Car. IL, c. 13. By 2 and 3 Ann., c. 9, an additional third, and 
by 3 and 4 Ann., c. 5, an additional two-thirds of the Old Subsidy were im- 
posed, and by 21 Geo. II., c. 2, another amount equal to the Old Subsidy 
(“the impost 1747”) was further imposed. So between 1747 and 1773 the 
duties were those of 22 Car. II., c. 13, plus three times those of 12 Car. II., c. 
4. This gives the following scheme:— 

Beans to 28s. pay 20s. and after till 40s. pay i6s. gd. then is. 

Barley to 28s. pays 20s. and after till 32s. pays i6s. gd. then is. 

Oats to i6s. pay 5s. ii*2d. and then pay 9*6d. 

Pease to 40s. pay i6s. 7* 2d. and then pay 9*6d. 

Rye to 36s. pays 20s. and after till 40s. pays i6s. gd. then is. 

Wheat to 44s. pays 22s. and after till 533. 4d. pays 17s. then gs. till 
80s., and after that is. 4d. 

Saxby’s figures are slightly less, as they take into account a 5 per cent, dis- 
count obtainable on all the subsidies except one. The note appears first in ed. 2. 

Eds. I and 2 do not contain “subsequent laws still further increased those 
duties, ’ and read “the distress which in years of scarcity the strict execution 
of this statute might have brought.” 

“ These do not seem to have been numerous. There were cases in 1737 and 
1766. See the table in Charles Smith, Three Tracts upon the Corn Trade and 
Corn Laws, 2nd ed., pp. 44, 45. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE 50$ 

exported, the growers will be careful never to grow more, and the 
importers never to import more, than what the bare consumption of 
the home market requires. That market will very seldom be over- 
stocked; but it will generally be understocked, the people, whose 
business it is to supply it, being generally afraid lest their goods 
should be left upon their hands. The prohibition of exportation lim- 
its the improvement and cultivation of the country to what the sup- 
ply of its own inhabitants requires. The freedom of exportation en- 
ables it to extend cultivation for the supply of foreign nations. 

By the 12th of Charles II. c. 4. the exportation of corn was per- Liberty 
mitted whenever the price of wheat did not exceed forty shillings of ox- ^ 
the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion.®^ By the 15th of 
the same prince,®® this liberty was extended till the price of wheat complete 
exceeded forty-eight shillings the quarter; and by the 2 2d,®® to all 
higher prices. A poundage, indeed, was to be paid to the king upon 
such exportation. But all grain was rated so low in the book of rates, 
that this poundage amounted only upon wheat to a shilling, upon 
oats to four pence, and upon all other grain to six pence the quar- 
ter.®"^ By the ist of William and Mary,®® the act which established 
the bounty, this small duty was virtually taken off whenever the 
price of wheat did not exceed forty-eight shillings the quarter; and 
by the nth and 12th of William III. c. 20. it was expressly taken 
off at all higher prices. 

The trade of the merchant exporter was, in this manner, not only 
encouraged by a bounty, but rendered much more free than that of 
the inland dealer. By the last of these statutes, corn could be en- 
grossed at any price for exportation; but it could not be engrossed 
for inland sale, except when the price did not exceed forty-eight 
shillings the quarter.®® The interest of the inland dealer, however, it though 

has already been shown, can never be opposite to that of the great thein- 

Eds. I and 2 read “extend its cultivation,” 

Earlier statutes are 15 Hen. VI., c. 2; 20 Hen. VI., c. 6; 23 Hen. VI, c. 

6 ; I and 2 P. and M., c. 5 ; 5 Eliz., c. S, § 26; 13 Eliz., c. 13 ; and i Jac., c. 25, 

§§ 26, 27. The preamble of the first of these says “by the law it was ordained 
that no man might carry nor bring com out of the realm of England without 
the King's licence, for cause whereof fpmers and other men which use man- 
urement of their land may not sell their com but of a bare price to the great 
damage of all the realm.” Exportation was therefore legalised wthout licence 
when grain was above certain prices. 

"C. 7. "C. 13. 

The “Book of Rates” (see above, p, 503, note) rated wheat for export at 
20s., oats at 6s. 8d., and other grain at los. the quarter, and the duty was a 
shilling in the pound on these values. 

I W. and M., c. 12. The bounty was to be given “without taking or re- 
quiring anything for custom.” 

Because as to inland sale 15 Car. II, c. 7 (above, p 499), remained h 
force. 



terest of 
the ex- 
porter 
sometimes 
differs 
from that 
of the 
people of 
his coun- 
try. 


The bad 

policy of 

some 

great 

countries 

may 

sometimes 
render it 
necessary 
for smaU 
countries 
to restrain 
exporta- 
tion. 


So6 the wealth of NATIONS 

body of the people. That of the merchant exporter may, and in fact 
sometimes is. If, while his own country labours under a dearth, a 
neighbouring country should be afflicted with a famine, it might be 
his interest to carry corn to the latter country in such quantities as 
might very much aggravate the calamities of the dearth The plen- 
tiful supply of the home market was not the direct object of those 
statutes; but, under the pretence of encouraging agriculture, to 
raise the money price of corn as high as possible, and thereby to oc- 
casion, as much as possible, a constant dearth in the home market. 
By the discouragement of importation, the supply of that market, 
even in times of great scarcity, was confined to the home growth; 
and by the encouragement of exportation, when the price was so 
high as forty-eight shillings the quarter, that market was not, even 
in times of considerable scarcity, allowed to enjoy the whole of that 
growth. The temporary laws, prohibiting for a limited time the ex- 
portation of corn, and taking off for a limited time the duties upon 
its importation, expedients to which Great Britain has been obliged 
so frequently to have recourse,*^® sufficiently demonstrate the im- 
propriety of her general system. Had that system been good, she 
would not so frequently have been reduced to the necessity of de- 
parting from it. 

Were all nations to follow the liberal system of free exportation 
and free importation, the different states into which a great contin- 
ent was divided would so far resemble the different provinces of a 
great empire. As among the different provinces of a great empire 
the freedom of the inland trade appears, both from reason and ex- 
perience, not only the best palliative of a dearth, but the most ef- 
fectual preventative of a famine; so would the freedom of the ex- 
portation and importation trade be among the different states into 
which a great continent was divided. The larger the continent, the 
easier the communication through all the different parts of it, both 
by land and by water, the less would any one particular part of it 
ever be exposed to either of these calamities, the scarcity of any one 
country being more likely to be relieved by the plenty of some 
other. But very few countries have entirely adopted this liberal sys- 
tem. The freedom of the corn trade is almost every where more or 
less restrained, and, in many countries, is confined by such absurd 
regulations, as frequently aggravate the unavoidable misfortune of a 
dearth, into the dreadful calamity of a famine. The demand of such 
countries for corn may frequently become so great and so urgent, 

™ The Acts prohibiting exportation were much more numerous than the 
others. See above, p, 504, note 62, and the table in Charles Smith there re- 
ferred to. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE So? 

that a small state in their neighbourhood, which happened at the 
same time to be labouring under some degree of dearth, could not 
venture to supply them without exposing itself to the like dreadful 
calamity. The very bad policy of one country may thus render it in 
some measure dangerous and imprudent to establish what would 
otherwise be the best policy in another. The unlimited freedom of 
exportation, however, would be much less dangerous in great states, 
in which the growth being much greater, the supply could seldom be 
much affected by any quantity of corn that was likely to be ex- 
ported. In a Swiss canton, or in some of the little states of Italy, it 
may, perhaps, sometimes be necessary to restrain the exportation of 
corn. In such great countries as France or England it scarce ever 
can. To hinder, besides, the farmer from sending his goods at all 
times to the best market, is evidently to sacrifice the ordinary laws 
of justice to an idea of public utility, to a sort of reasons of state; 
an act of legislative authority which ought to be exercised only, 
which can be pardoned only in cases of the most urgent necessity. 

The price at which the exportation of corn is prohibited, if it is ever 
to be prohibited, ought always to be a very high price. 

The laws concerning corn may every where be compared to the The corn 
laws concerning religion. The people feel themselves so much inter- 
ested in what relates either to their subsistence in this life, or to jawson 

their happiness in a life to come, that government must yield to religion, 

their prejudices, and, in order to preserve the public tranquillity, 
establish that system which they approve of. It is upon this account, 
perhaps, that we so seldom find a reasonable system established 
with regard to either of those two capital objects. 

IV. The trade of the merchant carrier, or of the importer of for- iv. The 
eign corn in order to export it again, contributes to the plentiful sup- 
ply of the home market. It is not indeed the direct purpose of his 
trade to sell his corn there. But he will generally be willing to do so, trade con. 
and even for a good deal less money than he might expect in a for- 
eign market ; because he saves in this manner the expence of loading plentiful 

and unloading, of freight and insurance. The inhabitants of the supply of 

country which, by means of the carrying trade, becomes the maga- Market ^ 

zine and storehouse for the supply of other countries, can very sel- 
dom be in want themselves. Though the carrying trade might thus 
contribute to reduce the average money price of corn in the home 
market, it would not thereby lower its real value. It would only 
raise somewhat the real value of silver. 

The carr3dng trade was in effect prohibited in Great Britain, British 
upon all ordinary occasions, by the high duties upon the importa- lawin ef- 
tion of foreign corn, of the greater part of which there was no draw- 



hibited 
the carry- 
ing trade 
in corn. 


The pros- 
perity of 
Great 
Britain 
is not due 
to the 
corn 
bounty, 
but to the 
security 
of enjoy- 
ing the 
fruits of 
labour. 


That the 
greatest 
pros- 
perity 
has been 
subse- 
quent 
proves 
nothing. 

Spain and 
Portugal 
are poorer 
than 
Great 
Britain 
because 
their bad 
policy is 
more ef- 
fectual, 


S08 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

back; and upon extraordinary occasions, when a scarcity made 
it necessary to suspend those duties by temporary statutes, expor- 
tation was always prohibited. By this system of laws, therefore, the 
carrying trade was in effect prohibited upon all occasions. 

That system of laws, therefore, which is connected with the es- 
tablishment of the bounty, seems to deserve no part of the praise 
which has been bestowed upon it. The improvement and prosperity 
of Great Britain, which has been so often ascribed to those laws, 
may very easily be accounted for by other causes. That security 
which the laws in Great Britain give to every man that he shall en- 
joy the fruits of his own labour, is alone sufficient to make any coun- 
try flourish, notwithstanding these and twenty other absurd regu- 
lations of commerce; and this security was perfected by the revolu- 
tion, much about the same time that the bounty was established. 
The natural effort of every individual to better his own condition, 
when suffered to exert itself with freedom and security, is so power- 
ful a principle, that it is alone, and without any assistance, not only 
capable of carrying on the society to wealth and prosperity, but of 
surmounting a hundred impertinent obstructions with which the 
folly of human laws too often incumbers its operations; though the 
effect of these obstructions is always more or less either to encroach 
upon its freedom, or to diminish its security. In Great Britain in- 
dustry is perfectly secure; and though it is far from being perfectly 
free, it is as free or freer than in any other part of Europe. 

Though the period of the greatest prosperity and improvement of 
Great Britain, has been posterior to that system of laws which is 
connected with the bounty, we must not upon that account impute 
it to those laws. It has been posterior likewise to the national debt. 
But the national debt has most assuredly not been the cause of it. 

Though the system of laws which is connected with the bounty, 
has exactly the same tendency with the police of Spain and Portu- 
gal; to lower somewhat the value of the precious metals in the coun- 
try where it takes place; yet Great Britain is certainly one of the 
richest countries in Europe, while Spain and Portugal are perhaps 
among the most beggarly. This difference of situation, however, 
may easily be accounted for from two different causes. First, the 
tax in Spain, the prohibition in Portugal of exporting gold and sil- 
ver,^^ and the vigilant police which watches over the execution of 
those laws, must, in two very poor countries, which between them 
import annually upwards of six millions sterling,’^^ operate, not only 

^ Ed. I does not contain “of the greater part of which there was no draw- 
back.” 

According to the argument above, p. 480, ” See above, p. 478. 

Above, vol. i , pp. 207-209. 



DIGRESSION ON THE CORN TRADE Sog 

more directly, but much more forcibly in reducing the value of those 
metals there, than the corn laws can do in Great Britain. And, sec- 
ondly, this bad policy is not in those countries counter-balanced by 
the general liberty and security of the people. Industry is there 
neither free nor secure, and the civil and ecclesiastical governments 
of both Spain and Portugal, are such as would alone be sufficient to 
perpetuate their present state of poverty, even though their regula- 
tions of commerce were as wise as the greater part of them are ab- 
surd and foolish. 

The 13th of the present king, c. 43. seems to have established a 
new system with regard to the corn laws, in many respects better 
than the ancient one, but in one or two respects perhaps not quite 
so good. 

By this statute the high duties upon importation for home con- 
sumption are taken off so soon as the price of middling wheat rises 
to forty-eight shillings the quarter; that of middling rye, pease or 
beans, to thirty-two shillings; that of barley to twenty-four shill- 
ings; and that of oats to sixteen shillings; and instead of them a 
small duty is imposed of only six-pence upon the quarter of wheat, 
and upon that of other grain in proportion. With regard to all these 
different sorts of grain, but particularly with regard to wheat, the 
home market is thus opened to foreign supplies at prices consider- 
ably lower than before.*^^ 

By the same statute the old bounty of five shillings upon the ex- 
portation of wheat ceases so soon as the price rises to forty-four 
shillings the quarter, instead of forty-eight, the price at which it 
ceased before; that of two shillings and six-pence upon the exporta- 
tion of barley ceases so soon as the price rises to twenty-two shill- 
ings, instead of twenty-four, the price at which it ceased before; 
that of two shillings and six-pence upon the exportation of oatmeal 
ceases so soon as the price rises to fourteen shillings, instead of fif- 
teen, the price at which it ceased before. The bounty upon rye is re- 
duced from three shillings and six-pence to three shillings, and it 
ceases so soon as the price rises to twenty-eight shillings, instead of 
thirty-two, the price at which it ceased before.'^'® If bounties are as 

Ed. 1 reads “in one respect.” 

Ed. I reads only “By this statute the high duties upon importation for 
home consumption are taken off as soon as tiie price of wheat is so high as 
forty-eight shillings the quarter, and instead.” 

In place of this sentence ed. i reads “The home market is in this manner 
not so totally excluded from foreign supplies as it was before. 

’®Ed. I reads (from the beginning of the paragraph) “By the same stat- 
ute the old bounty of five shillings upon the quarter of wheat ceases when 
the price rises so high as forty-four shillings, and upon that of other grain in 
proportion. The bounties too upon the coarser sorts of grain are reduced 


and not 
counter- 
acted bj 
general 
liberty 
and se- 
curity. 


The 13 
Geo III.. 
C.43, 


opens the 
home 
market at 
lower 
prices 


stops the 

bounty 

earlier, 



and ad- 
mits corn 
lor re- 
export 
dutyfree; 


which are 
improve- 
ments, 

but it 
gives a 
bounty on 
the export 
of oats, 

and pro- 
hibits ex- 
portation 
of grain 
at prices 
much too 
low. 


It is as 
good a 
law as can 
be expect- 
ed at 
present. 


510 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

improper as I have endeavoured to prove them to be, the sooner 
they cease, and the lower they are, so much the better. 

The same statute permits, at the lowest prices, the importation of 
corn, in order to be exported again, duty free, provided it is in the 
meantime lodged in a warehouse under the joint locks of the king 
and the importer.'^® This liberty, indeed, extends to no more than 
twenty-five of the different ports of Great Britain. They are, how- 
ever, the principal ones, and there may not, perhaps, be warehouses 
proper for this purpose in the greater part of the others.®^ 

So far this law seems evidently an improvement upon the ancient 
system. 

But by the same law a bounty of two shillings the quarter is given 
for the exportation of oats whenever the price does not exceed four- 
teen shillings. No bounty had ever been given before for the export- 
ation of this grain, no more than for that of peas or beans.®^ 

By the same law too, the exportation of wheat is prohibited so 
soon as the price rises to forty-four shillings the quarter; that of 
rye so soon as it rises to twenty-eight shillings; that of barley so 
soon as it rises to twenty-two shillings; and that of oats so soon as 
they rise to fourteen shillings. Those several prices seem all of them 
a good deal too low, and there seems to be an impropriety, besides, 
in prohibiting exportation altogether at those precise prices at 
which that bounty, which was given in order to force it, is with- 
drawn.®^ The bounty ought certainly either to have been with- 
drawn at a much lower price, or exportation ought to have been al- 
lowed at a much higher. 

So far, therefore, this law seems to be inferior to the ancient sys- 
tem. With all its imperfections, however, we may perhaps say of it 
what was said of the laws of Solon, that, though not the best in 
itself, it is the best which the interests, prejudices, and temper of 
the times would admit of. It may perhaps in due time prepare the 
way for a better.®® 

somewhat lower than they were before, even at the prices at which they take 
place.” 

™ Ed. I reads “The same statute permits at all prices the importation of 
com in order to be exported again, duty free; provided it is in the meantime 
lodged in the king’s warehouse.” 

®®Ed I contains an additional sentence, “Some provision is thus made for 
the establishment of the carrying trade.” 

This paragraph is not in ed. i. 

®®Ed. I reads (from the beginning of the paragraph) “But by the same 
law exportation is prohibited as soon as the price of wheat rises to forty-four 
shillings the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion. The price seems 
to be a good deal too low, and there seems to be an impropriety besides in 
stopping exportation altogether at the very same price at which that bounty 
which was given in order to force it is withdrawn. 

These two sentences are not in ed. i. 



m 


CHAPTER VI 

OF TREATIES OF COMMERCE 

When a nation binds itself by treaty either to permit the entry of 
certain goods from one foreign country which it prohibits from all 
others, or to exempt the goods of one country from duties to which 
it subjects those of all others, the country, or at least the merchants 
and manufacturers of the country, whose commerce is so favoured, 
must necessarily derive great advantage from the treaty. Those 
merchants and manufacturers enjoy a sort of monopoly in the coun- 
try which is so indulgent to them. That country becomes a market 
both more extensive and more advantageous for their goods: more 
extensive, because the goods of other nations being either excluded 
or subjected to heavier duties, it takes off a great quantity of theirs: 
more advantageous, because the merchants of the favoured coun- 
try, enjoying a sort of monopoly there, will often sell their goods 
for a better price than if exposed to the free competition of all other 
nations. 

Such treaties, however, though they may be advantageous to the 
merchants and manufacturers of the favoured, are necessarily dis- 
advantageous to those of the favouring country. A monopoly is 
thus granted against them to a foreign nation; and they must fre- 
quently buy the foreign goods they have occasion for, dearer than 
if the free competition of other nations was admitted. That part of 
its own produce with which such a nation purchases foreign goods, 
must consequently be sold cheaper, because when two things are 
exchanged for one another, the cheapness of the one is a necessary 
consequence, or rather is the same thing with the dearness of the 
other. The exchangeable value of its annual produce, therefore, is 
likely to be diminished by every such treaty. This diminution, how- 
ever, can scarce amount to any positive loss, but only to a lessen- 
ing of the gain which it might otherwise make. Though it sells its 
goods cheaper than it otherwise might do, it will not probably sell 
them for less than they cost; nor, as in the case of bounties, for a 
price which will not replace the capital employed in bringing them 

511 


Treaties 
of com- 
merce are 
advanta- 
geous to 
the fa- 
voured, 


but disad 
vanta- 
geousto 
the fa- 
vouring 
country. 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Treaties 
have been 
concluded 
with the 
object of 
obtaining 
a favour- 
able bal- 
ance of 
trade, 

e g., the 

Methuen 

treaty, 


5x^ 

to market, together with the ^rdinary profits of stock. The trade 
could not go on long if it did. Even the favouring country, there- 
fore, may still gain by the trade, though less than if there was a 
free competition. 

Some treaties of commerce, however, have been supposed advan- 
tageous upon principles very different from these; and a commer- 
cial country has sometimes granted a monopoly of this kind against 
itself to certain goods of a foreign nation, because it expected that 
in the whole commerce between them, it would annually sell more 
than it would buy, and that a balance in gold and silver would be 
annually returned to it. It is upon this principle that the treaty of 
commerce between England and Portugal, concluded in 1703, by 
Mr. Methuen, has been so much commended.^ The following is a 
literal translation ^ of that treaty, which consists of three articles 
only. 


ART. I 

His sacred royal majesty of Portugal promises, both in his own 
name, and that of his successors, to admit, for ever hereafter, into 
Portugal, the woollen cloths, and the rest of the woollen manufac- 
tures of the British, as was accustomed, till they were prohibited by 
the law; nevertheless upon this condition: 


ART. II 

That is to say, that her sacred royal majesty of Great Britain 
shall, in her own name, and that of her successors, be obliged, for 
ever hereafter, to admit the wines of the growth of Portugal into 
Britain: so that at no time, whether there shall be peace or war 
between the kingdoms of Britain and France, any thing more shall 
be demanded for these wines by the name of custom or duty, or by 
whatsoever other title, directly or indirectly, whether they shall be 
imported into Great Britain in pipes or hogsheads, or other casks, 
than what shall be demanded for the like quantity or measure of 
French wine, deducting or abating a third part of the custom or 

Eg., in the British Merchant, 1721, Dedication to vol. iii. 

®With three small exceptions, “British” for “Britons” and “law” for “laws” 
in art. i, and “for” instead of “from” before “the like quantity or measure of 
French wine,” the translation is identical with that given in A Collection of 
all the Treaties of Peace, Alliance and Commerce between Great Britain and 
other Powers from the Revolution in 1688 to the Present Time, 1772, vol. i., 
pp. 61, 62. 



TREATIES OF COMMERCE 5^3 

duty. But if at any time this deduction or abatement of customs, 
which is to be made as aforesaid, shall in any manner be attempted 
and prejudiced, it shall be just and lawful for his sacred royal maj- 
esty of Portugd, again to prohibit the woollen cloths, and the rest 
of the British woollen manufactures. 


ART. Ill 

The most excellent lords the plenipotentiaries promise and take 
upon themselves that their above-named masters shall ratify this 
treaty; and within the space of two months the ratifications shall be 
exchanged. 


By this treaty the crown of Portugal becomes bound to admit 
the English woollens upon the same footing as before the prohibi- 
tion; that is, not to raise the duties which had been paid before that 
time. But it does not become bound to admit them upon any bet- 
ter terms than those of any other nation, of France or Holland for 
example. The crown of Great Britain, on the contrary, becomes 
bound to admit the wines of Portugal, upon paying only two-thirds 
of the duty, which is paid for those of France, the wines most likely 
to come into competition with them. So far this treaty, therefore, is 
evidently advantageous to Portugal, and disadvantageous to Great 
Britain. 

It has been celebrated, however, as a masterpiece of the commer- 
cial policy of England. Portugal receives annually from the Brazils 
a greater quantity of gold than can be employed in its domestic 
commerce, whether in the shape of coin or of plate. The surplus is 
too valuable to be allowed to lie idle and locked up in coffers, and 
as it can find no advantageous market at home, it must, notwith- 
standing any prohibition, be sent abroad, and exchanged for some- 
thing for which there is a more advantageous market at home. A 
large share of it comes annually to England, in return either for 
English goods, or for those of other European nations that receive 
their returns through England. Mr. Baretti was informed that the 
weekly packet-boat from Lisbon brings, one week with another, 
more than fifty thousand pounds in gold to England.^ The sum had 
probably been exaggerated. It would amount to more than two mil- 


’ Joseph Baretti, Journey from London to Genoa, through England, Portu- 
gal, Spain and Prance, 3rd ed., 1170, vol. i., pp. 95 > ?6, 
is not so large as in the text above: it is “often from thirty to fifty and 
even sixty thousand pounds,” and not “one week with another but almost 
every week.” The gold all came in the packet boat because it, p a war vesse , 
was exempt from search. — ^Raynal, Histoire pkilosophique, Amsterdam ed., 
1773, tom. iii., pp. 413^ 414* 


which is 
evidently 
advanta- 
geous to 
Portugal 
and dis- 
advanta- 
geous to 
Great 
Britain. 


Portugal 
sends 
much 
gold to 
England , 



514 


at one 
time 
nearly 
the whole 
of this 
gold was 
said to 
be on ac- 
count of 
other 
European 
nations, 


but even 
if it were 
not so, 
the trade 
would not 
be more 
valuable 
than an- 
other of 
equal 
magni- 
tude. 

Most of 
the gold 
must be 
sent 
abroad 
again and 
exchanged 
for goods, 
and it 
would be 
better to 
buy the 
goods 
direct 
with 
home 
produce 
instead 
ofbuymg 
gold in 
Portugal. 


THE WEALTH OP NATIONS 

lions six hundred thousand pounds a year, which is more than the 
Brazils are supposed to afford.^ 

Our merchants were some years ago out of humour with the 
crown of Portugal. Some privileges which had been granted them, 
not by treaty, but by the free grace of that crown, at the solicita- 
tion, indeed, it is probable, and in return for much greater favours, 
defence and protection, from the crown of Great Britain, had been 
either infringed or revoked. The people, therefore, usually most in- 
terested in celebrating the Portugal trade, were then rather disposed 
to represent it as less advantageous than it had commonly been im- 
agined. The far greater part, almost the whole, they pretended, of 
this annual importation of gold, was not on account of Great Brit- 
ain, but of other European nations; the fruits and wines of Portu- 
gal annually imported into Great Britain nearly compensating the 
value of the British goods sent thither. 

Let us suppose, however, that the whole was on account of Great 
Britain, and that it amounted to a still greater sum than Mr. Bar- 
etti seems to imagine: this trade would not, upon that account, be 
more advantageous than any other in which, for the same value sent 
out, we received an equal value of consumable goods in return. 

It is but a very small part of this importation which, it can be 
supposed, is employed as an annual addition either to the plate or 
to the coin of the kingdom. The rest must all be sent abroad and 
exchanged for consumable goods of some kind or other. But if those 
consumable goods were purchased directly with the produce of Eng- 
lish industry, it would be more for the advantage of England, than 
first to purchase with that produce the gold of Portugal, and after- 
wards to purchase with that gold those consumable goods. A direct 
foreign trade of consumption is always more advantageous than a 
round-about one; ^ and to bring the same value of foreign goods to 
the home market, requires a much smaller capital in the one way ^ 
than in the other. If a smaller share of its industry, therefore, had 
been employed in producing goods fit for the Portugal market, and 
a greater in producing those fit for the other markets, where those 
consumable goods for which there is, a demand in Great Britain are 
to be had, it would have been more for the advantage of England. 
To procure both the gold, which it wants for its own use, and the 
consumable goods, would, in this way, employ a much smaller capi- 
tal than at present. There would be a spare capital, therefore, to be 
employed for other purposes, in exciting en additional quantity of 
industry, and in raising a greater annual produce. 

* Above, vol. i., pp. 208, 209. ® Above, p. 350. 

® Ed. I does not contain “way,” 



TREATIES OF COMMERCE 5^5 

Though Britain were entirely excluded from the Portugal trade, 
it could find very little difficulty in procuring all the annual sup- 
plies of gold which it wants, either for the purposes of plate, or of 
coin, or of foreign trade. Gold, like every other commodity, is al- 
ways somewhere or another to be got for its value by those who 
have that value to give for it. The annual surplus of gold in Portu- 
gal, besides, would still be sent abroad, and though not carried 
away by Great Britain, would be carried away by some other na- 
tion, which would be glad to sell it again for its price, in the same 
manner as Great Britain does at present. In buying gold of Portu- 
gal, indeed, we buy it at the first hand; whereas in buying it of any 
other nation, except Spain, we should buy it at the second, and 
might pay somewhat dearer. This difference, however, would surely 
be too insignificant to deserve the public attention. 

Almost all our gold, it is said, comes from Portugal. With other 
nations the balance of trade is either against us, or not much in our 
favour. But we should remember, that the more gold we import 
from one country, the less we must necessarily import from all 
others. The effectual demand for gold, like that for every other com- 
modity, is in every country limited to a certain quantity. If nine- 
tenths of this quantity are imported from one country, there re- 
mains a tenth only to be imported from all others. The more gold 
besides that is annually imported from some particular countries, 
over and above what is requisite for plate and for coin, the more 
must necessarily be exported to some others; and the more that 
most insignificant object of modern policy, the balance of trade, ap- 
pears to be in our favour with some particular countries, the more 
it must necessarily appear to be against us with many others. 

It was upon this silly notion, however, that England could not 
subsist without the Portugal trade, that, towards the end of the late 
war,"^ France and Spain, without pretending either offence or provo- 
cation, required the king of Portugal to exclude all British ships 
from his ports, and for the security of this exclusion, to receive into 
them French or Spanish garrisons. Had the king of Portugal sub- 
mitted to those ignominious terms which his brother-in-law the king 
of Spain proposed to him, Britain would have been freed from a 
much greater inconveniency than the loss of the Portugal trade, the 
burden of supporting a very weak ally, so unprovided of every 
thing for his own defence, that the whole power of England, had it 
been directed to that single purpose, could scarce perhaps have de- 
fended him for another campaign. The loss of the Portugal trade 
would, no doubt, have occasioned a considerable embarrassment to 

^In 1762. 


Britain 
would 
find little 
difficulty 
in pro- 
curing 
pld even 
if ex- 
cluded 
from 
trade 
with 

Portugal. 


It is said 

that all 

our gold 

comes 

from 

Portugal, 

but if It 

did not 

come 

from 

Portugal 

it would 

come 

from 

other 

countries. 


If the at- 
tempt of 
France 
and Spain 
to exclude 
British 
ships 

from Por- 
tuguese 
ports had 
been suc- 
cessful, it 
would 
have been 
an advan- 
tage to 
England. 



The great 
importa- 
tion of 
gold and 
silver is 
for 

foreign 

trade. 


Very little 
is re- 
quired for 
plate and 
coin. 


New gold 
plate is 
mostly 
made 
from old. 


New coin 
is mostly 
made 
from old, 
as there is 
a profit 
on melt- 
ing good 
coin. 


516 the wealth of nations 

the merchants at that time engaged in it, who might not, perhaps, 
have found out, for a year or two, any other equally advantageous 
method of employing their capitals; and in this would probably 
have consisted all the inconvieniency which England could have 
suffered from this notable piece of commercial policy. 

The great annual importation of gold and silver is neither for 
the purpose of plate nor of coin, but of foreign trade. A round-about 
foreign trade of consumption can be carried on more advantageous- 
ly by means of these metals than of almost any other goods. As they 
are the universal instruments of commerce, they -are more readily 
received in return for all commodities than any other goods; and on 
account of their small bulk and great value, it costs less to transport 
them backward and forward from one place to another than almost 
any other sort of merchandize, and they lose less of their value by 
being so transported. Of all the commodities, therefore, which are 
bought in one foreign country, for no other purpose but to be sold 
or exchanged again for some other goods in another, there are none 
so convenient as gold and silver. In facilitating all the different 
round-about foreign trades of consumption which are carried on in 
Great Britain, consists the principal advantage of the Portugal 
trade; and though it is not a capital advantage, it is, no doubt, a 
considerable one. 

That any annual addition which, it can reasonably be supposed, 
is made either to the plate or to the coin of the kingdom, could re- 
quire but a very small annual importation of gold and silver, seems 
evident enough; and though we had no direct trade with Portugal, 
this small quantity could always, somewhere or another, be very 
easily got. 

Though the goldsmiths’ trade be very considerable in Great Brit- 
ain, the far greater part of the new plate which they annually sell, 
is made from other old plate melted down; so that the addition an- 
nually made to the whole plate of the kingdom cannot be very great, 
and could require but a very small annual importation. 

It is the same case with the coin. Nobody imagines, I believe, 
that even the greater part of the annual coinage, amounting, for ten 
years together, before the late reformation of the gold coin,® to up- 
wards of eight hundred thousand pounds a year in gold,^ was an an- 
nual addition to the money before current in the kingdom. In a 
country where the expence of the coinage is defrayed by the gov- 
ernment, the value of the coin, even when it contains its full stand- 
ard weight of gold and silver, can never be much greater than that 
of an equal quantity of those metals uncoined; because it requires 

® See above, p. 42. ® Above, p. 286, note. 



TREATIES OF COMMERCE 5i7 

only the trouble of going to the mint, and the delay perhaps of a 
few weeks, to procure for any quantity of uncoined gold and silver 
an equal quantity of those metals in coin. But, in every country, the 
greater part of the current coin is almost always more or less worn, 
or otherwise degenerated from its standard. In Great Britain it was, 
before the late reformation, a good deal so, the gold being more than 
two per cent, and the silver more than eight per cent, below its 
standard weight. But if forty-four guineas and a half, containing 
their full standard weight, a pound weight of gold, could purchase 
very little more than a pound weight of uncoined gold, forty-four 
guineas and a half wanting a part of their weight could not purchase 
a pound weight, and something was to be added in order to make up 
the deficiency. The current price of gold bullion at market, there- 
fore, instead of being the same with the mint price, or 46Z. 14.5. 6d. 
was then about 47/. 14^, and sometimes about forty-eight pounds. 

When the greater part of the coin, however, was in this degenerate 
condition, forty-four guineas and a half, fresh from the mint, would 
purchase no more goods in the market than any other ordinary 
guineas, because when they came into the coffers of the merchant, 
being confounded with other money, they could not afterwards be 
distinguished without more trouble than the difference was worth. 

Like other guineas they were worth no more than 46/. 14^. 6 d. If 
thrown into the melting pot, however, they produced, without any 
sensible loss, a pound weight of standard gold, which could be sold 
at any time for between 47^. 14J. and 48^. either in gold or silver, as 
fit for all the purposes of coin as that which had been melted down. 

There was an evident profit, therefore, in melting down new coined 
money, and it was done so instantaneously, that no precaution of 
government could prevent it. The operations of the mint were, upon 
this account, somewhat like the web of Penelope; the work that was 
done in the day was undone in the night. The mint was employed, 
not so much in making daily additions to the coin, as in replacing 
the very best part of it which was daily melted down. 

Were the private people, who carry their gold and silver to the Aseignoi- 
mint, to pay themselves for the coinage, it would add to the value vdue 
of those metals in the same manner as the fashion does to that of of coin 
plate. Coined gold and silver would be more valuable than un- 
coined. The seignorage, if it was not exorbitant, would add to the bullion of 
bullion the whole value of the duty; because, the government hav- equal 

ing every where the exclusive privilege of coining, no coin can come weight, 
to market cheaper than they think proper to afford it. If the duty 
was exorbitant indeed, that is, if it was very much above the real 
value of the labour and expence requisite for coinage, false coiners, 



as in 
France. 


It dimin- 
ishes or 
destroys 
the profit 
obtained 
by melt- 
ing coin. 


si8 the wealth of nations 

both at home and abroad, might be encouraged, by the great dif- 
ference between the value of bullion and that of coin, to pour in so 
great a quantity of counterfeit money as might reduce the value ol 
the government money. In France, however, though the seignorage 
is eight per cent, no sensible inconveniency of this kind is found to 
arise from it. The dangers to which a false coiner is every where ex- 
posed, if he lives in the country of which he counterfeits the coin, 
and to which his agents or correspondents are exposed if he lives in 
a foreign country, are by far too great to be incurred for the sake of 
a profit of six or seven per cent. 

The seignorage in France raises the value of the coin higher than 
in proportion to the quantity of pure gold which it contains. Thus 
by the edict of January 1726, the mint price of fine gold of twen- 
ty-four carats was fixed at seven hundred and forty iivres nine sous 
and one denier one-eleventh, the mark of eight Paris ounces. The 
gold coin of France, making an allowance for the remedy of the 
mint, contains twenty-one carats and three-fourths of fine gold, and 
two carats one-fourth of alloy. The mark of standard gold, there- 
fore, is worth no more than about six hundred and seventy-one 
Iivres ten deniers. But in France this mark of standard gold is 
coined into thirty Louis-d^ors of twenty-four Iivres each, or into 
seven hundred and twenty Iivres. The coinage, therefore, increases 
the value of a mark of standard gold bullion, by the difference be- 
tween six hundred and seventy-one Iivres ten deniers, and seven 
hundred and twenty Iivres; or by forty-eight Iivres nineteen sous 
and two deniers. 

A seignorage will, in many cases, take away altogether, and will, 
in all cases, diminish the profit of melting down the new coin. This 
profit always arises from the difference between the quantity of bul- 
lion which the common currency ought to contain, and that which 
it actually does contain. If this difference is less than the seignorage, 
there will be loss instead of profit. If it is equal to the seignorage, 
there will neither be profit nor loss. If it is greater than the 

See Dictionaire des Monnoies, tom ii. article Seigneurage, p. 489. par M. 
Abot de Bazinghen, Conseiller-Commissaire en la Cour des Monnoies a Paris. 
Ed. I reads erroneously “tom. i.” The book is Traiti des Monnoies et de la 
jurisdiction de la Cour des Monnoies en forme de dictionnaire, par M. Abot de 
Bazinghen, Conseiller-Commissaire en la Cour des Monnoies de Paris, 1764, 
and the page is not 489, but 589. Gamier, in his edition of the Wealth of Na- 
tions, vol. V., p. 234, says the book “n’est gufere qu’une compilation faite sans 
soin et sans discernement,” and explains that the mint price mentioned above 
remained in force a very short time. It having failed to bring bullion to the 
mint, much higher prices were successively offered, and when the Wealth of 
Nations was published the seignorage only amounted to about 3 per cent. On 
the silver coin it was then about 2 per cent., in place of the 6 per cent, stated 
by Bazinghen, p. 590. 



TREATIES OE COMMERCE 5^9 

seignorage, there will indeed be some profit, but less than if there 
was no seignorage. If, before the late reformation of the gold coin, 
for example, there had been a seignorage of five per cent, upon the 
coinage, there would have been a loss of three per cent, upon the 
melting down of the gold coin. If the seignorage had been two per 
cent, there would have been neither profit nor loss. If the seignorage 
had been one per cent, there would have been a profit, but of one 
per cent, only instead of two per cent. Wherever money is received 
by tale, therefore, and not by weight, a seignorage is the most ef- 
fectual preventative of the melting down of the coin, and, for the 
same reason, of its exportation. It is the best and heaviest pieces 
that are commonly either melted down or exported; because it is 
upon such that the largest profits are made. 

The law for the encouragement of the coinage, by rendering it 
duty-free, was first enacted, during the reign of Charles II.^^ for a 
limited time; and afterwards continued, by different prolongations, 
till 1769, when it was rendered perpetual.^^ The bank of England, 
in order to replenish their coffers with money, are frequently 
obliged to carry bullion to the mint; and it was more for their in- 
terest, they probably imagined, that the coinage should be at the ex- 
pence of the government, than at their own. It was, probably, out 
of complaisance to this great company that the government agreed 
to render this law perpetual. Should the custom of weighing gold, 
however, come to be disused, as it is very likely to be on account of 
its inconveniency; should the gold coin of England come to be re- 
ceived by tale, as it was before the late recoinage, this great com- 
pany may, perhaps, find that they have upon this, as upon some 
other occasions, mistaken their own interest not a little. 

Before the late recoinage, when the gold currency of England was 
two per cent, below its standard weight, as there was no seignorage, 
it was two per cent, below the value of that quantity of standard 
gold bullion which it ought to have contained, l^en this great com- 
pany, therefore, bought gold bullion in order to have it coined, they 
were obliged to pay for it two per cent, more than it was worth after 
the coinage. But if there had been a seignorage of two per cent, upon 
the coinage, the common gold currency, though two per cent, below 

^ “An act for encouraging of coinage,” 18 Car. II., _c. 5. The preamble says, 
“Whereas it is obvious that the plenty of current coins of gold and silver of 
this Ungdom is of great advantap to trade and commerce; for the increase 
whereof, your Majesty in your princely wisdom and care hath been graciously 
pleased to bear out of your revenue half the charge of the coinage of silver 
money.” 

^ Originally enacted for five years, it was renewed by 25 Car. II., c. 8 , for 
seven years, revived for seven years by i Jac. IL, c, 7 j and continued by 
various Acts till made perpetual by 9 Geo. III., c. 25. 


The abo- 
lition of 
seignor- 
age in 
England 
was 

probably 
due to the 
bank of 
England, 


but the 
bank 
would 
have lost 
nothing 
by a 
seignor- 
age 

whether it 
equalled 
the depre- 
ciation. 



exceeded 

it, 


or fell 
short of 
it. 


Nor 

would it 
lose if 
there 
were no 
depreda- 
tion. 


A seignor- 
age is paid 
by no one, 


and could 
not have 
augment- 
ed the ex- 
pense of 
the bank. 


520 XHE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

its standard weight, would notwithstanding have been equal in 
value to the quantity of standard gold which it ought to have con- 
tained; the value of the fashion compensating in this case the dim- 
inution of the weight. They would indeed have had the seignorage 
to pay, which being two per cent, their loss upon the whole transac- 
tion would have been two per cent, exactly the same, but no greater 
than it actually was. 

If the seignorage had been five per cent, and the gold currency 
only two per cent, below its standard weight, the bank would in this 
case have gained three per cent, upon the price of the bullion ; but as 
they would have had a seignorage of five per cent, to pay upon the 
coinage, their loss upon the whole transaction would, in the same 
manner, have been exactly two per cent. 

If the seignorage had been only one per cent, and the gold cur- 
rency two per cent, below its standard weight, the bank would in 
this case have lost only one per cent, upon the price of the bullion; 
but as they would likewise have had a seignorage of one per cent, to 
pay, their loss upon the whole transaction would have been exactly 
two per cent, in the same manner as in all other cases. 

If there was a reasonable seignorage, while at the same time the 
coin contained its full standard weight, as it has done very nearly 
since the late re-coinage, whatever the bank might lose by the seign- 
orage, they would gain upon the price of the bullion; and whatever 
they might gain upon the price of the bullion, they would lose by 
the seignorage. They would neither lose nor gain, therefore, upon 
the whole transaction, and they would in this, as in all the foregoing 
cases, be exactly in the same situation as if there was no seignorage. 

When the tax upon a commodity is so moderate as not to encour- 
age smuggling, the merchant who deals in it, though he advances, 
does not properly pay the tax, as he gets it back in the price of the 
commodity. The tax is finally paid by the last purchaser or con- 
sumer. But money is a commodity with regard to which every man 
is a merchant. Nobody buys it but in order to sell it again; and with 
regard to it there is in ordinary cases no last purchaser or consumer. 
When the tax upon coinage, therefore, is so moderate as not to en- 
courage false coining, though every body advances the tax, nobody 
finally pays it; because every body gets it back in the advanced 
value of the coin. 

A moderate seignorage, therefore, would not in any case augment 
the expence of the bank, or of any other private persons who carry 
their bullion to the mint in order to be coined, and the want of a 
moderate seignorage does not in any case diminish it. Whether there 
is or is not a seignorage, if the currency contains its full standard 



TREATIES OF COMMERCE S2i 

weight, the coinage costs nothing to any body, and if it is short of 
that weight, the coinage must always cost the difference between the 
quantity of bullion which ought to be contained in it, and that 
which actually is contained in it. 

The government, therefore, when it defrays the expence of coin- 
age, not only incurs some small expence, but loses some small rev- 
enue which it might get by a proper duty; and neither the bank nor 
any other private persons are in the smallest degree benefited by 
this useless piece of public generosity. 

The directors of the bank, however, would probably be unwilling 
to agree to the imposition of a seignorage upon the authority of a 
speculation which promises them no gain, but only pretends to in- 
sure them from any loss. In the present state of the gold coin, and 
as long as it continues to be received by weight, they certainly 
would gain nothing by such a change. But if the custom of weighing 
the gold coin should ever go into disuse, as it is very likely to do, 
and if the gold coin should ever fall into the same state of degrada- 
tion in which it was before the late recoinage, the gain, or more 
properly the savings of the bank, in consequence of the imposition 
of a seignorage, would probably be very considerable. The bank of 
England is the only company which sends any considerable quan- 
tity of bullion to the mint, and the burden of the annual coinage 
falls entirely, or almost entirely, upon it. If this annual coinage had 
nothing to do but to repair the unavoidable losses and necessary 
wear and tear of the coin, it could seldom exceed fifty thousand 
or at most a hundred thousand pounds. But when the coin is de- 
graded below its standard weight, the annual coinage must, besides 
this, fill up the large vacuities which exportation and the melting 
pot are continually making in the current coin. It was upon this ac- 
count that during the ten or twelve years immediately preceding 
the late reformation of the gold coin, the annual coinage amounted 
at an average to more than eight hundred and fifty thousand 
pounds.^^ But if there had been a seignorage of four or five per cent, 
upon the gold coin, it would probably, even in the state in which 
things then were, have put an effectual stop to the business both of 
exportation and of the melting pot. The bank, instead of losing 
every year about two and a half per cent, upon the bullion which 
was to be coined into more than eight hundred and fifty thousand 
pounds, or incurring an annual loss of more than twenty-one thou- 
sand two hundred and fifty pounds, would not probably have in- 
curred the tenth part of that loss. 

The revenue allotted by parliament for defraying the expence of 

^®Ed. I reads “tear and wear.” Above, p. 


The 
govern- 
ment loses 
and no- 
body 
gains by 
the ab- 
sence of 
seignor- 
age. 

Suppos- 
ing the 
coin 
should 
again be- 
come de- 
preciated, 
a seignor- 
age would 
preserve 
the bank 
from con- 
siderable 
loss. 



The sav- 
ing to the 
govern- 
ment may 
be regard- 
ed as too 
trifling, 
but that 
of the 
bank is 
worth 
considei- 
ation. 


522 the wealth of nations 

the coinage is but fourteen thousand pounds a year/^ and the real 
expence which it costs the government, or the fees of the officers of 
the mint, do not upon ordinary occasions, I am assured, exceed the 
half of that sum. The saving of so very small a sum, or even the 
gaining of another which could not well be much larger, are objects 
too inconsiderable, it may be thought, to deserve the serious atten- 
tion of government. But the saving of eighteen or twenty thousand 
pounds a year in case of an event which is not improbable, which 
has frequently happened before, and which is very likely to happen 
again, is surely an object which well deserves the serious attention 
even of so great a company as the bank of England. 

Some of the foregoing reasonings and observations might per- 
haps have been more properly placed in those chapters of the first 
book which treat of the origin and use of money, and of the differ- 
ence between the real and the nominal price of commodities. But as 
the law for the encouragement of coinage derives its origin from 
those vulgar prejudices which have been introduced by the mercan- 
tile system; I judged it more proper to reserve them for this chap- 
ter. Nothing could be more agreeable to the spirit of that system 
than a sort of bounty upon the production of money, the very thing 
which, it supposes, constitutes the wealth of every nation. It is one 
of its many admirable expedients for enriching the country. 

“ Under 19 Geo. IL, c. 14, § 2, a maximum of £15,000 is prescribed. 



CHAPTER VII 


OF COLONIES 

Part First 

Of the Motives for establishing new Colonies 

The interest which occasioned the first settlement of the different 
European colonies in America and the West Indies, was not alto- 
gether so plain and distinct as that which directed the establishment 
of those of ancient Greece and Rome. 

All the different states of ancient Greece possessed, each of them, 
but a very small territory, and when the people in any one of them 
multiplied beyond what that territory could easily maintain, a part 
of them were sent in quest of a new habitation in some remote and 
distant part of the world; the warlike neighbours who surrounded 
them on all sides, rendering it difficult for any of them to enlarge 
very much its territory at home. The colonies of the Dorians resort- 
ed chiefly to Italy and Sicily, which, in the times preceding the foun- 
dation of Rome, were inhabited by barbarous and uncivilized na- 
tions: those of the lonians and Eolians, the two other great tribes of 
the Greeks, to Asia Minor and the islands of the Egean Sea, of which 
the inhabitants seem at that time to have been pretty much in the 
same state as those of Sicily and Italy. The mother city, though she 
considered the colony as a child, at all times entitled to great favour 
and assistance, and owing in return much gratitude and respect, yet 
considered it as an emancipated child, over whom she pretended to 
claim no direct authority or jurisdiction. The colony settled its own 
form of government, enacted its own laws, elected its own magis- 
trates, and made peace or war with its neighbours as an independent 
state, which had no occasion to wait for the approbation or consent 
of the mother city. Nothing can be more plain and distinct than the 
interest which directed every such establishment. 

Rome, like most of the other ancient republics, was originally 
founded upon an Agrarian law, which divided the public territory 

523 


Greek 
colonies 
were sent 
out when 
the popu- 
lation 
grew too 
great at 
home 


The 

mother 

city 

claimed 
no au- 
thority. 


Roman 

colonies 



524 


THE WEALTH OF ^AllOhS 


were sent 
out to 
satisfy th-» 
demand 
for lands 
and to 
establish 
garrisons 
in con- 
quered 
territo- 
ries; 


they were 
entirely 


in a certain proportion among the different citizens who composed 
the state. The course of human affairs, by marriage, by succession, 
and by alienation, necessarily deranged this original division, and 
frequently threw the lands, which had been allotted for the main* 
tenance of many different families into the possession of a single 
person. To remedy this disorder, for such it was supposed to be, a 
law was made, restricting the quantity of land which any citizen 
could possess to five hundred jugera, about three hundred and fifty 
English acres. This law, however, though we read of its having been 
executed upon one or two occasions, was either neglected or evaded, 
and the inequality of fortunes went on continually increasing. The 
greater part of the citizens had no land, and without it the manners 
and customs of those times rendered it difficult for a freeman to 
maintain his independency. In the present times, though a poor man 
has no land of his own, if he has a little stock, he may either farm 
the lands of another, or he may carry on some little retail trade; 
and if he has no stock, he may find employment either as a country 
labourer, or as an artificer. But, among the ancient Romans, the 
lands of the rich were all cultivated by slaves, who wrought under 
an overseer, who was likewise a slave; so that a poor freeman had 
little chance of being employed either as a farmer or as a labourer. 
All trades and manufactures too, even the retail trade, were carried 
on by the slaves of the rich for the benefit of their masters, whose 
wealth, authority, and protection made it difficult for a poor free- 
man to maintain the competition against them. The citizens, there- 
fore, who had no land, had scarce any other means of subsistence 
but the bounties of the candidates at the annual elections. The 
tribunes, when they had a mind to animate the people against the 
rich and the great, put them in mind of the ancient division of lands, 
and represented that law which restricted this sort of private prop- 
erty as the fundamental law of the republic. The people became 
clamorous to get land, and the rich and the great, we may believe, 
were perfectly determined not to give them any part of theirs. To 
satisfy them in some measure, therefore, they frequently proposed 
to send out a new colony. But conquering Rome was, even upon 
such occasions, under no necessity of turning out her citizens to 
seek their fortune, if one may say so, through the wide world, with- 
out knowing where they were to settle. She assigned them lands 
generally in the conquered provinces of Italy, where, being within 
the dominions of the republic, they could never form any inde- 
pendent state; but were at best but a sort of corporation, which, 
though it had the power of enacting bye-laws for its own govern- 
ment, was at all times subject to the correction, jurisdiction, and 



MOTIVES FOR NEW COLONIES 5^5 

legislative authority of the mother city. The sending out a colony of 
this kind, not only gave some satisfaction to the people, but often 
established a sort of garrison too in a newly conquered province, of 
which the obedience might otherwise have been doubtful. A Roman 
colony, therefore, whether we consider the nature of the establish- 
ment itself, or the motives for making it, was altogether different 
from a Greek one. The words accordingly, which in the original lan- 
guages denote those different establishments, have very different 
meanings. The Latin word (Colonia) signifies simply a plantation. 
The Greek word (axoata), on the contrary, signifies a separation 
of dwelling, a departure from home, a going out of the house. But, 
though the Roman colonies were in many respects different from 
the Greek ones, the interest which prompted to establish them was 
equally plain and distinct. Both institutions derived their origin 
either from irresistible necessity, or from clear and evident utility. 

The establishment of the European colonies in America and the 
West Indies arose from no necessity: and though the utility which 
has resulted from them has been very great, it is not altogether so 
clear and evident. It was not understood at their first establishment, 
and was not the motive either of that establishment or of the dis- 
coveries which gave occasion to it; and the nature, extent, and lim- 
its of that utility are not, perhaps, well understood at this day. 

The Venetians, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, 
carried on a very advantageous commerce in spiceries, and other 
East India goods, which they distributed among the other nations 
of Europe. They purchased them chiefly ^ in Egypt, at that time 
under the dominion of the Mammeluks, the enemies of the Turks, 
of whom the Venetians were the enemies; and this union of interest, 
assisted by the money of Venice, formed such a connection as gave 
the Venetians almost a monopoly of the trade. 

The great profits of the Venetians tempted the avidity of the 
Portuguese. They had been endeavouring, during the course of the 
fifteenth century, to find out by sea a way to the countries from 
which the Moors brought them ivory and gold dust across the Des- 
art. They discovered the Madeiras, the Canaries, the Azores, the 
Cape de Verd islands, the coast of Guinea, that of Loango, Congo, 
Angola, and Benguela,^ and finally, the Cape of Good Hope. They 
had long wished to share in the profitable traffic of the Venetians, 
and this last discovery opened to them a probable prospect of doing 
so. In 1497, Vasco de Gama sailed from the port of Lisbon with a 
fleet of four ships, and, after a navigation of eleven months, ar- 


subject to 
the 

mother 

city. 


The 

utility of 
the Amer- 
ican colo- 
nies is not 
so evi- 
dent. 


The 

Venetians 

had a 

profitable 

trade in 

East 

India 

goods, 


which 

was 

envied by 
the Por- 
tuguese 
and led 
them to 
discover 
the Cape 
of Good 
Hope 
passage, 


^ “Chiefly” is not in ed. i. 



while 
Columbus 
endeav- 
voured 
to reach 
the East 
Indies by 
sailing 
west- 
wards. 


Columbus 
mistook 
the coun- 
tries he 
found for 
the 

Indies, 


526 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

rived upon the coast of Indostan, and thus completed a course of 
discoveries which had been pursued with great steadiness, and with 
very little interruption, for near a century together. 

Some years before this, while the expectations of Europe were in 
suspense about the projects of the Portuguese, of which the success 
appeared yet to be doubtful, a Genoese pilot formed the yet more 
daring project of sailing to the East Indies by the West. The situa- 
tion of those countries was at that time very imperfectly known in 
Europe. The few European travellers who had been there had mag- 
nified the distance; perhaps through simplicity and ignorance, 
what was really very great, appearing almost infinite to those who 
could not measure it; or, perhaps, in order to increase somewhat 
more the marvellous of their own adventures in visiting regions so 
immensely remote from Europe. The longer the way was by the 
East, Columbus very justly concluded, the shorter it would be by 
the West. He proposed, therefore, to take that way, as both the 
shortest and the surest, and he had the good fortune to convince 
Isabella of Castile of the probability of his project. He sailed from 
the port of Palos in August 1492, near five years before the expedi- 
tion of Vasco de Gama set out from Portugal, and, after a voyage 
of between two and three months, discovered first some of the small 
Bahama or Lucayan islands, and afterwards the great island of St. 
Domingo. 

But the countries which Columbus discovered, either in this or 
in any of his subsequent voyages, had no reseifiblance to those 
which he had gone in quest of. Instead of the wealth, cultivation 
and populousness of China and Indostan, he found, in St. Do- 
mingo, and in all the other parts of the new world which he ever vis- 
ited, nothing but a country quite covered with wood, uncultivated, 
and inhabited only by some tribes of naked and miserable savages. 
He was not very willing, however, to believe that they were not the 
same with some of the countries described by Marco Polo, the first 
European who had visited, or at least had left behind him any 
description of China or the East Indies; and a very slight re- 
semblance, such as that which he found between the name of Cibao, 
a mountain in St. Domingo, and that of Cipango, mentioned by 
Marco Polo, was frequently sufficient to make him return to this 
favourite prepossession, though contrary to the clearest evidence.'^ 
In his letters to Ferdinand and Isabella he called the countries 
which he had discovered, the Indies. He entertained no doubt but 
that they were the extremity of those which had been described by 

* P. F. X. de Charlevoix, Histoire de VIsle Espagnole ou de S. Domingue, 
1730, tom. i., p. 99. 



MOTIVES FOR NEW COLONIES 52 ? 

Marco Polo, and that they were not very distant from the Ganges, 
or from the countries which had been conquered by Alexander. 

Even when at last convinced that they were different, he still flat- 
tered himself that those rich countries were at no great distance, 
and in a subsequent voyage, accordingly, went in quest of them 
along the coast of Terra Firma, and towards the isthmus of Darien. 

In consequence of this mistake of Columbus, the name of the Hence the 
Indies has stuck to those unfortunate countries ever since; and E^^and 
when it was at last clearly discovered that the new were altogether west ^ 
different from the old Indies, the former were called the West, in Indies, 
contradistinction to the latter, which were called the East Indies. 

It was of importance to Columbus, however, that the countries The coun- 
which he had discovered, whatever they were, should be repre- 
sented to the court of Spain as of very great consequence; an^ in were not 
what constitutes the real riches of every country, the animal and ^ich 
vegetable productions of the soil, there was at that time nothing 
which could well justify such a representation of them. 

The Cori, something between a rat and a rabbit, and supposed in animals 
by Mr. Buffon ^ to be the same with the Aperea of Brazil, was the 
largest viviparous quadruped in St. Domingo. This species seems 
never to have been very numerous, and the dogs and cats of the 
Spaniards are said to have long ago almost entirely extirpated it, 
as well as some other tribes of a still smaller size.^ These, however, 
together with a pretty large lizard, called the Ivana or Iguana,® 
constituted the principal part of the animal food which the land 
afforded. 

The vegetable food of the inhabitants, though from their want orvege- 
of industry not very abundant, was not altogether so scanty. It 
consisted in Indian corn, yams, potatoes, bananes, &c. plants which 
were then altogether unknown in Europe, and which have never 
since been very much esteemed in it, or supposed to yield a sus- 
tenance equal to what is drawn from the common sorts of grain and 
pulse, which have been cultivated in this part of the world time out 
of mind. 

The cotton plant indeed afforded the material of a very impor- pttonbe- 

tant manufacture, and was at that time to Europeans undoubtedly then con- 

the most valuable of all the vegetable productions of those islands, sidered of 

But though in the end of the fifteenth century the muslins and great con- 

other cotton goods of the East Indies were much esteemed in every 
part of Europe, the cotton manufacture itself was not cultivated in 

^ Histoire Naturelle, tom. xv. (1750), pp. 160, 162. 

’■* Charlevoix, Btstoire de Vlsle Espagnok, tom. i., pp. 35, 36. 

‘ Ibid., 



So Co- 
lumbus 
relied on 
the min- 
erals. 


The 
Council 
of Castile 
was at- 
tracted 
by the 
gold, Co- 
lumbus 
proposing 
that the 
govern- 
ment 
should 
have half 
the gold 
and silver 
dis- 
covered. 


528 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

any part of it. Even this production, therefore, could not at that 
time appear in the eyes of Europeans to be of very great conse- 
quence. 

Finding nothing either in the animals or vegetables of the newly 
discovered countries, which could justify a very advantageous rep- 
resentation of them, Columbus turned his view towards their min- 
erals; and in the richness of the productions of this third kingdom, 
he flattered himself, he had found a full compensation for the in- 
significancy of those of the other two. The little bits of gold with 
which the inhabitants ornamented their dress, and which, he was 
informed, they frequently found in the rivulets and torrents that 
fell from the mountains, were sufficient to satisfy him that those 
mountains abounded with the richest gold mines. St. Domingo, 
therefore, was represented as a country abounding with gold, and 
upon that account (according to the prejudices not only of the 
present times, but of those times), an inexhaustible source of real 
wealth to the crown and kingdom of Spain. When Columbus, 
upon his return from his first voyage, was introduced with a sort of 
triumphal honours to the sovereigns of Castile and Arragon, the 
principal productions of the countries which he had discovered 
were carried in solemn procession before him. The only valuable 
part of them consisted in some little fillets, bracelets, and other 
ornaments of gold, and in some bales of cotton. The rest were mere 
objects of vulgar wonder and curiosity; some reeds of an extraor- 
dinary size, some birds of a very beautiful plumage, and some 
stuffed skins of the huge alligator and manati; all of which were 
preceded by six or seven of the wretched natives, whose singular 
colour and appearance added greatly to the novelty of the shew. 

In consequence of the representations of Columbus, the council 
of Castile determined to take possession of countries of which the 
inhabitants were plainly incapable of defending themselves. The 
pious purpose of converting them to Christianity sanctified the in- 
justice of the project. But the hope of finding treasures of gold 
there, was the sole motive which prompted to undertake it; and to 
give this motive the greater weight, it was proposed by Columbus 
that the half of all the gold and silver that should be found there 
should belong to the crown. This proposal was approved of by the 
council. 

As long as the whole or the far greater part of the gold, which 
the first adventurers imported into Europe, was got by so very 
easy a method as the plundering of the defenceless natives, it was 
not perhaps very difficult to pay even this heavy tax. But when the 
natives were once fairly stript of all that they had, which, in St. 



MOTIVES FOR NEW COLONIES 

Domingo, and in all the other countries discovered by Columbus, This was 
was done completely in six or eight years, and when in order to find 
more it had become necessary to dig for it in the mines, there was LaVS 
no longer any possibility of paying this tax. The rigorous exaction soonre- 
of it, accordingly, first occasioned, it is said, the total abandoning 
of the mines of St. Domingo, which have never been wrought since. 

It was soon reduced therefore to a third; then to a fifth; after- 
wards to a tenth ; and at last to a twentieth part of the gross prod- 
uce of the gold mines,"^ The tax upon silver continued for a long 
time to be a fifth of the gross produce. It was reduced to a tenth 
only in the course of the present century.® But the first adventur- 
ers do not appear to have been much interested about silver. Noth- 
ing less precious than gold seemed worthy of their attention. 

All the other enterprises of the Spaniards in the new world, sub- The sub- 
sequent to those of Columbus, seem to have been prompted by the g 

same motive. It was the sacred thirst of gold that carried Oieda, eS:er- 

Nicuessa, and Vasco Nugnes de Balboa, to the isthmus of Darien, pnses 

that carried Cortez to Mexico, and Almagro and Pizzarro to Chile prompted 

and Peru. When those adventurers arrived upon any unknown by the 

coast, their first enquiry was always if there was any gold to be same 

found there; and according to the information which they received 
concerning this particular, they determined either to quit the coun- 
try or to settle in it. 

Of all those expensive and uncertain projects, however, which A prudent 
bring bankruptcy upon the greater part of the people who engage in 
them, there is none perhaps more perfectly ruinous than the search ^gh to 

after new silver and gold mines. It is perhaps the most disadvan- encourage 

tageous lottery in the world, or the one in which the gain of those 
who draw the prizes bears the least proportion to the loss of those mining, 
who draw the blanks: for though the prizes are few and the blanks 
many, the common price of a ticket is the whole fortune of a very 
rich man. Projects of mining, instead of replacing the capital em- 
ployed in them, together with the ordinary profits of stock, com- 
monly absorb both capital and profit. They are the projects, there- 
fore, to which of all others a prudent law-giver, who desired to in- 
crease the capital of his nation, would least chuse to give any extra- 
ordinary encouragement, or to turn towards them a greater share of 
that capital than what would go to them of its own accord. Such in 
reality is the absurd confidence which almost all men have in their 

^ Above, p. 170. 

® Ed. I (in place of these two sentences) reads, “The tax upon silver, in- 
deed, still continues to be a fifth of the gross produce.” Cp. above, p. 169. 



but 
people 
have al- 
ways be- 
lieved in 
an Eldo- 
rado. 


In this 
case ex- 
pectations 
were to 


530 the wealth of nations 

own good fortune, that wherever there is the least probability of 
success, too great a share of it is apt to go to them of its own accord. 

But though the judgment of sober reason and experience con- 
cerning such projects has always been extremely unfavourable, that 
of human avidity has commonly been quite otherwise. The same 
passion which has suggested to so many people the absurd idea of 
the philosopher’s stone, has suggested to others the equally absurd 
one of immense rich mines of gold and silver. They did not consider 
that the value of those metals has, in all ages and nations, arisen 
chiefly from their scarcity, and that their scarcity has arisen from 
the very small quantities of them which nature has any where de- 
posited in one place, from the hard and intractable substances with 
which she has almost every where surrounded those small quan- 
tities, and consequently from the labour and expence which are 
every where necessary in order to penetrate to and get at them. 
They flattered themselves that veins of those metals might in many 
places be found as large and as abundant as those which are com- 
monly found of lead, or copper, or tin, or iron. The dream of Sir 
Walter Raleigh concerning the golden city and country of El- 
dorado,^ may satisfy us, that even wise men are not always exempt 
from such strange delusions. More than a hundred years after the 
death of that great man, the Jesuit Gumila was still convinced of 
the reality of that wonderful country, and expressed with great 
warmth, and I dare to say, with great sincerity, how happy he 
should be to carry the light of the gospel to a people who could so 
well reward the pious labours of their missionary 

In the countries first discovered by the Spaniards, no gold or sil- 
ver mines are at present known which are supposed to be worth the 
working. The quantities of those metals which the first adventurers 
are said to have found there, had probably been very much mag- 

® “That mighty, rich and beautiful empire of Guiana, and . . . that great 
and golden city which the Spaniards call El Dorado.”— Raleigh^s Works^ ed. 
Thomas Birch, 1751, voL ii., p. 141. 

Jos. Gumilla, Histoite naturelle civile et $iographique de VOrinoquef 
etc., traduite par M. Eidous, 1758, tom. ii., pp. 46, 117, 131, 132, 137, 138, 
but the sentiment is apparently attributed to the author who is described on 
the title page as “de la compagnie de Jesus, superieur des missions de rOr 4 - 
noque,” on the strength of a mistranslation of the French or possibly the 
original Spanish. If “Dieu permit” were mistranslated “God permit,” the fol- 
lowing passage from pp. 137, 138 would bear out the text “On cherchait une 
vallee ou un territoire dont les rochers et les pierres etaient d^or, et les Indiens 
pour flatter la cupidity des Espagnols, et les 61 oigner en mSme temps de chez 
eux, leur peignaient avec les couleurs les plus vives Tor dont ce pays abondait 
pour se d^barrasser plut6t de ces h6tes incommodes, et Dieu permit que les 
Espagnols ajoutassent foi k ces rapports, pour quils d^couvrissent un plus 
grand nombre de provinces, et que la lumi^re de FEvangile pht sV r6pandre 
avec plus de facility.” 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES S3i 

nified, as well as the fertility of the mines which were wrought im- 
mediately after the first discovery. What those adventurers were re- 
ported to have found, however, was sufficient to inflame the avidity 
of all their countrymen. Every Spaniard who sailed to America ex- 
pected to find an Eldorado. Fortune too did upon this what she has 
done upon very few other occasions. She realized in some measure 
the extravagant hopes of her votaries, and in the discovery and con- 
quest of Mexico and Peru (of which the one happened about thirty, 
the other about forty years after the first expedition of Columbus) , 
she presented them with something not very unlike that profusion 
of the precious metals which they sought for. 

A project of commerce to the East Indies, therefore, gave occa- 
sion to the first discovery of the West. A project of conquest gave 
occasion to all the establishments of the Spaniards in those newly 
discovered countries. The motive which excited them to this con- 
quest was a project of gold and silver mines; and a course of acci- 
dents, which no human wisdom could foresee, rendered this project 
much more successful than the undertakers had any reasonable 
grounds for expecting. 

The first adventures of all the other nations of Europe, who at- 
tempted to make settlements in America, were animated by the like 
chimerical views; but they were not equally successful. It was more 
than a hundred years after the first settlement of the Brazils, before 
any silver, gold, or diamond mines were discovered there. In the 
English, French, Dutch, and Danish colonies, none have ever yet 
been discovered; at least none that are at present supposed to be 
worth the working. The first English settlers in North America, 
however, offered a fifth of all the gold and silver which should be 
found there to the king, as a motive for granting them their patents. 
In the patents to Sir Walter Raleigh, to the London and Plymouth 
companies, to the council of Plymouth, &c. this fifth was accord- 
ingly reserved to the crown. To the expectation of finding gold and 
silver mines, those first settlers too joined that of discovering a 
north-west passage to the East Indies. They have hitherto been dis- 
appointed in both. 


Part Second 

Causes 0} the Prosperity of new Colonies 

The colony of a civilized nation which takes possession either of a 
waste country, or of one so thinly inhabited, that the natives easily 


some ex- 
tent real- 
ised, so 
far as the 
Spaniards 
were con- 
cerned, 


but the 
other na- 
tions were 
not so 
successful. 



532 


Colonists 
takeout 
knowl- 
edge and 
regular 
govern- 
ment, 


land is 
plentiful 
and 
cheap, 


wages are 


and chil- 
dren are 
taken care 
of and are 
profit- 
able. 


Popula- 
tion and 
improve- 
ment, 
which 
mean 
wealth 
and 

greatness, 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

give place to the new settlers, advances more rapidly to wealth and 
greatness than any other human society. 

The colonists carry out with them a knowledge of agriculture and 
of other useful arts, superior to what can grow up of its own accord 
in the course of many centuries among savage and barbarous na- 
tions. They carry out with them too the habit of subordination, 
some notion of the regular government which takes place in their 
own country, of the system of laws which supports it, and of a 
regular administration of justice; and they naturally establish 
something of the same kind in the new settlement. But among sav- 
age and barbarous nations, the natural progress of law and govern- 
ment is still slower than the natural progress of arts, after law and 
government have been so far established, as is necessary for their 
protection. Every colonist gets more land than he can possibly cul- 
tivate. He has no rent, and scarce any taxes to pay. No landlord 
shares with him in its produce, and the share of the sovereign is 
commonly but a trifle. He has every motive to render as great as 
possible a produce, which is thus to be almost entirely his own. But 
his land is commonly so extensive, that with all his own industry, 
and with all the industry of other people whom he can get to em- 
ploy, he can seldom make it produce the tenth part of what it is 
capable of producing. He is eager, therefore, to collect labourers 
from all quarters, and to reward them with the most liberal wages. 
But those liberal wages, joined to the plenty and cheapness of land, 
soon make those labourers leave him, in order to become landlords 
themselves, and to reward, with equal liberality, other labourers, 
who soon leave them for the same reason that they left their first 
master. The liberal reward of labour encourages marriage. The 
children, during the tender years of infancy, are well fed and prop- 
erly taken care of, and when they are grown up, the value of their 
labour greatly overpays their maintenance. When arrived at ma- 
turity, the high price of labour, and the low price of land, enable 
them to establish themselves in the same manner as their fathers 
did before them. 

In other countries, rent and profit eat up wages, and the two su- 
perior orders of people oppress the inferior one. But in new col- 
onies, the interest of the two superior orders obliges them to treat 
the inferior one with more generosity and humanity; at least, where 
that inferior one is not in a state of slavery. Waste lands of the 
greatest natural fertility, are to be had for a trifle. The increase of 
revenue which the proprietor, who is always the undertaker, ex- 

^^Eds. 1-4 reads “support.” 



PROSPERITY OE NEW COLONIES 533 

pects from their improvement constitutes his profit; which in these are en- 
circumstances is commonly very great. But this great profit cannot couraged 
be made without employing the labour of other people in clearing 
and cultivating the land; and the disproportion between the great 
extent of the land and the small number of the people, which com- 
monly takes place in new colonies, makes it difficult for him to get 
this labour. He does not, therefore, dispute about wages, but is will- 
ing to employ labour at any price. The high wages of labour en- 
courage population. The cheapness and plenty of good land encour- 
age improvement, and enable the proprietor to pay those high 
wages. In those wages consists almost the whole price of the land; 
and though they are high, considered as the wages of labour, they 
are low, considered as the price of what is so very valuable. What 
encourages the progress of population and improvement, encourages 
that of real wealth and greatness. 

The progress of many of the ancient Greek colonies towards The pro- 
wealth and greatness, seems accordingly to have been very rapid. 

In the course of a century or two, several of them appear to have colonies 

rivalled, and even to have surpassed their mother cities. Syracuse was very 
and Agrigentum in Sicily, Tarentum and Locri in Italy, Ephesus 
and Miletus in Lesser Asia, appear by all accounts to have been at 
least equal to any of the cities of ancient Greece. Though posterior 
in their establishment, yet all the arts of refinement, philosophy, 
poetry, and eloquence, seem to have been cultivated as early, and 
to have been improved as highly in them, as in any part of the mo- 
ther country. The schools of the two oldest Greek philosophers, 
those of Thales and Pythagoras, were established, it is remarkable, 
not in ancient Greece, but the one in an Asiatic, the other in an 
Italian colony All those colonies had established themselves in 
countries inhabited by savage and barbarous nations, who easily 
gave place to the new settlers. They had plenty of good land, and 
as they were altogether independent of the mother city, they were 
at libel ty to manage their own affairs in the way that they judged 
was most suitable to their own interest. 

The history of the Roman colonies is by no means so brilliant. That of 
Some of them, indeed, such as Florence, have in the course of many 
ages, and after the fall of the mother aty, grown up to be consider- njeg 
able states. But the progress of no one of them seems ever to have less so. 
been very rapid. They were all established in conquered provinces, 
which in most cases had been fully inhabited before. The quantity 
of land assigned to each colonist was seldom very considerable, and 
“ Miletus and Crotona. 



The 

American 
colonies 
have had 
plenty of 
land and 
not very 
much in- 
terference 
from their 
mother 
countries. 


The prog- 
ress of the 
Spanish 
colonies, 
Mexico 
and Peru, 
has been 
very con- 
siderable. 


534 the wealth OF NATIONS 

as the colony was not independent, they were not always at liberty 
to manage their own affairs in the way that they judged was most 
suitable to their own interest. 

In the plenty of good land, the European colonies established in 
America and the West Indies resemble, and even greatly surpass, 
those of ancient Greece. In their dependency upon the mother 
state, they resemble those of ancient Rome; but their great dis- 
tance from Europe has in all of them alleviated more or less the ef- 
fects of this dependency. Their situation has placed them less in the 
view and less in the power of their mother country. In pursuing 
their interest their own way, their conduct has, upon many occa- 
sions, been overlooked, either because not known or not understood 
in Europe; and upon some occasions it has been fairly suffered and 
submitted to, because their distance rendered it difficult to restrain 
it. Even the violent and arbitrary government of Spain has, upon 
many occasions, been obliged to recall or soften the orders which 
had been given for the government of her colonies, for fear of a 
general insurrection. The progress of all the European colonies in 
wealth, population, and improvement, has accordingly been very 
great. 

The crown of Spain, by its share of the gold and silver, derived 
some revenue from its colonies, from the moment of their first es- 
tablishment. It was a revenue too, of a nature to excite in human 
avidity the most extravagant expectations of still greater riches. 
The Spanish colonies, therefore, from the moment of their first es- 
tablishment, attracted very much the attention of their mother 
country; while those of the other European nations were for a 
long time in a great measure neglected. The former did not, per- 
haps, thrive the better in consequence of this attention; nor the 
latter the worse in consequence of this neglect. In proportion to the 
extent of the country which they in some measure possess, the 
Spanish colonies are considered as less populous and thriving than 
those of almost any other European nation. The progress even of 
the Spanish colonies, however, in population and improvement, has 
certainly been very rapid and very great. The city of Lima, founded 
since the conquest, is represented by Ulloa, as containing fifty thou- 
sand inhabitants near thirty years ago.^^ Quito, which had been 
but a miserable hamlet of Indians, is represented by the same au- 
thor as in his time equally populous.^® Gemelli Carreri, a pretended 
traveller, it is said, indeed, but who seems every where to have writ- 
ten upon extreme good information, represents the city of Mexico 

“ Ed. I reads “its.” See above, pp. 203, 204. 

Juan and Ulloa, Voyage Ustonque^ tom. i , p. 229. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 535 

as containing a hundred thousand inhabitants; a number which, 
in spite of all the exaggerations of the Spanish writers, is, probably, 
more than five times greater than what it contained in the time of 
Montezuma. These numbers exceed greatly those of Boston, New 
York, and Philadelphia, the three greatest cities of the English 
colonies. Before the conquest of the Spaniards there were no cat- 
tle fit for draught either in Mexico or Peru. The lama was their 
only beast of burden, and its strength seems to have been a good 
deal inferior to that of a common ass. The plough was unknown 
among them. They were ignorant of the use of iron. They had no 
coined money, nor any established instrument of commerce of any 
kind. Their commerce was carried on by barter. A sort of wooden 
spade was their principal instrument of agriculture. Sharp stones 
served them for knives and hatchets to cut with; fish bones and the 
hard sinews of certain animals served them for needles to sew with; 
and these seem to have been their principal instruments of trade.^’’^ 

In this state of things, it seems impossible, that either of those em- 
pires could have been so much improved or so well cultivated as at 
present, when they are plentifully furnished with all sorts of Eu- 
ropean cattle, and when the use of iron, of the plough, and of many 
of the arts of Europe, has been introduced among them. But the 
populousness of every country must be in proportion to the degree 
of its improvement and cultivation. In spite of the cruel destruc- 
tion of the natives which followed the conquest, these two great em- 
pires are, probably, more populous now than they ever were be- 
fore: and the people are surely very different; for we must ac- 
knowledge, I apprehend, the the Spanish creoles are in many re- 
spects superior to the ancient Indians. 

After the settlements' of the Spaniards, that of the Portugueze in The Por- 
Brazil is the oldest of any European nation in America. But as for 
a long time after the first discovery, neither gold nor silver mines Brazilis 

were found in it, and as it afforded, upon that account, little or no very 

revenue to the crown, it was for a long time in a great measure 
neglected; and during this state of neglect, it grew up to be a great 
and powerful colony. While Portugal was under the dominion of 
Spain, Brazil was attacked by the Dutch, who got possession of 
seven of the fourteen provinces into which it is divided. They ex- 
pected soon to conquer the other seven, when Portugal recovered its 
independency by the elevation of the family of Braganza to the 
throne. The Dutch then, as enemies to the Spaniards, became 

^®In Awnsham and John Churchill’s Collection of Voyages and Travels, 

1704, vol. iv., p. 508. 

Cp. above, pp. 202, 203. 



536 the wealth OF NATIONS 

friends to the Portugueze, who were likewise the enemies of the 
Spaniards. They agreed, therefore, to leave that part of Brazil, 
which they had not conquered, to the king of Portugal, who agreed 
to leave that part which they had conquered to them, as a matter 
not worth disputing about with such good allies. But the Dutch 
Government soon began to oppress the Portugueze colonists, who, 
instead of amusing themselves with complaints, took arms against 
their new masters, and by their own valour and resolution, with 
the connivance, indeed, but without any avowed assistance from 
the mother country, drove them out of Brazil. The Dutch, there- 
fore, finding it impossible to keep any part of the country to them- 
selves, were contented that it should be entirely restored to the 
crown of Portugal.^® In this colony there are said to be more than 
six hundred thousand people,^^ either Portugueze or descended 
from Portugueze, creoles, mulattoes, and a mixed race between 
Portugueze and Brazilians. No one colony in America is supposed 
to contain so great a number of people of European extraction. 
iVhen Towards the end of the fifteenth, and during the greater part of 

the sixteenth century, Spain and Portugal were the two great naval 
various powers upon the ocean: for though the commerce of Venice ex- 

countries tended to every part of Europe, its fleets had scarce ever sailed be- 

a^ooting Mediterranean. The Spaniards, in virtue of the first dis- 

inAmer- covery, claimed all America as their own; and though they could 
not hinder so great a naval power as that of Portugal from settling 
in Brazil, such was, at that time, the terror of their name, that the 
greater part of the other nations of Europe were afraid to establish 
themselves in any other part of that great continent. The French, 
who attempted to settle in Florida, were all murdered by the 
Spaniards.^^ But the declension of the naval power of this latter 
nation, in consequence of the defeat or miscarriage of, what they 
called, their Invincible Armada, which happened towards the end 
of the sixteenth century, put it out of their power to obstruct any 
longer the settlements of the other European nations. In the course 
of the seventeenth century, therefore, the English, French, Dutch, 
Danes, and Swedes, all the great nations who had any ports upon 
the ocean, attempted to make some settlements in the new world. 
The The Swedes established themselves in New Jersey; and the num- 

Swedish ber of Swedish families still to be found there, sufficiently demon- 
New ^ strates, that this colony was very likely to prosper, had it been pro- 

Jersey tected by the mother country. But being neglected by Sweden 

“Raynal, Histoire philosophique, Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., pp. 347-. 
352. 

^^Ihid.j tom, iii., p. 424. ^ Ibid., tom vi , p. 8 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 537 

it was soon swallowed up by the Dutch colony of New York, which 
again, in 1674,21 fell under the dominion of the English. 

The small islands of St. Thomas and Santa Cruz are the only 
countries in the new world that have ever been possessed by the 
Danes. These little settlements too were under the government of an 
exclusive company, which had the sole right, both of purchasing 
the surplus produce of the colonists, and of supplying them with 
such goods of other countries as they wanted, and which, therefore, 
both in its purchases and sales, had not only the power of oppres- 
sing them, but the greatest temptation to do so. The government of 
an exclusive company of merchants is, perhaps, the worst of all 
governments for any country whatever. It was not, however, able 
to stop altogether* the progress of these colonies, though it ren- 
dered it more slow and languid. The late king of Denmark dis- 
solved this company, and since that time the prosperity of these 
colonies has been very great. 

The Dutch settlements in the West, as well as those in the East 
Indies, were originally put under the government of an exclusive 
company. The progress of some of them, therefore, though it has 
been considerable, in comparison with that of almost any country 
that has been long peopled and established, has been languid and 
slow in comparison with that of the greater part of new colonies. 
The colony of Surinam, though very considerable, is still inferior to 
the greater part of the sugar colonies of the other European nations. 
The colony of Nova Belgia, now divided into the two provinces of 
New York and New Jersey, would probably have soon become con- 
siderable too, even though it had remained under the government 
of the Dutch. The plenty and cheapness of good land are such pow- 
erful causes of prosperity, that the very worst government is scarce 
capable of checking altogether the efficacy of their operation. The 
great distance too from the mother country would enable the col- 
onists to evade more or less, by smuggling, the monopoly which the 
company enjoyed against them. At present the company allows all 
Dutch ships to trade to Surinam upon paying two and a half per 
cent, upon the value of their cargo for a licence; and only reserves 
to itself exclusively the direct trade from Africa to America, which 
consists almost entirely in the slave trade. This relaxation in the ex- 
clusive privileges of the company, is probably the principal cause 
of that degree of prosperity which that colony at present enjoys. 
Curagoa and Eustatia, the two principal islands belonging to the 
Dutch, are free ports open to the ships of all nations; and this free- 
dom, in the midst of better colonies whose ports are open to those 

^ A mistake for 1664. 


was pros- 
pering 
when 
swal- 
lowed up 
by New 
York. 

The 
Danish 
colonies 
of St. 
Thomas 
and Santa 
Cruz have 
been very 
prosper- 
ous since 
the exclu- 
sive com- 
pany was 
dissolved. 

The 
Dutch 
colony of 
Surinam 
is pros- 
perous 
though 
still under 
an exclu- 
sive com- 
pany. 



The 
French 
colony of 
Canada 
has shown 
rapid 
progress 
since the 
dissolu- 
tion of 
the ex- 
clusive 
company. 


St.Bo- 
mingOj in 
spite of 
various 
obstacles, 
and the 
Other 
French 
sugar 
colonies, 
are very 
thriving. 


But the 
progress 
of the 
English 
colonies 
has been 
the most 
rapid. 

They 
have not 
so much 
good land 


S3S the wealth of nations 

of one nation only, has been the great cause of the prosperity of 
those two barren islands* 

The French colony of Canada was, during the greater part of the 
last century, and some part of the present, under the government 
of an exclusive company. Under so unfavourable an administration 
its progress was necessarily very slow in comparison with that of 
other new colonies; but it became much more rapid when this com- 
pany was dissolved after the fall of what is called the Mississippi 
scheme. When the English got possession of this country, they 
found in it near double the number of inhabitants which father 
Charlevoix had assigned to it between twenty and thirty years be- 
fore.^^ That Jesuit had travelled over the whole country, and had no 
inclination to represent it as less considerable than it really was. 

The French colony of St. Domingo was established by pirates 
and free-booters, who, for a long time, neither required the pro- 
tection, nor acknowledged the authority of France; and when 
that race of banditti became so far citizens as to acknowledge 
this authority, it was for a long time necessary to exercise it with 
very great gentleness. During this period the population and im- 
provement of this colony increased very fast. Even the oppression 
of the exclusive company, to which it was for some time sub- 
jected, with all the other colonies of France, though it no doubt re- 
tarded, had not been able to stop its progress altogether. The course 
of its prosperity returned as soon as it was relieved from that op- 
pression. It is now the most important of the sugar colonies of the 
West Indies, and its produce is said to be greater than that of all 
the English sugar colonies put together. The other sugar colonies of 
France are in general all very thriving. 

But there are no colonies of which the progress has been more 
rapid than that of the English in North America. 

Plenty of good land, and liberty to manage their own affairs 
their own way, seem to be the two great causes of the prosperity of 
all new colonies. 

In the plenty of good land the English colonies of North Amer- 
ica, though, no doubt, very abundantly provided, are, however, in- 
ferior to those of the Spaniards and Portugueze, and not superior 
to some of those possessed by the French before the late war. But 
the political institutions of the English colonies have been more fa- 

F. X. de Charlevoix, Eistoire ei description ginirale de la Nouvelle 
France, avec le journal historique d^un voyage dans VAmirique Septentrion- 
nale, 1744, tom. ii., p. 390, speaks of a population of 20,000 to 25,000 in 1713. 
Raynal says in 1753 and 1758 the population, excluding troops and Indians, 
was gipoo—Histoire philosophique, Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. vi., p. 137. 

^ Ed. I reads “the.” 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 539 

vourable to the improvement and cultivation of this land, than 
those of any of the other three nations. 

First, the engrossing of uncultivated land, though it has by no 
means been prevented altogether, has been more restrained in the 
English colonies than in any other. The colony law which imposes 
upon every proprietor the obligation of improving and cultivating, 
within a limited time, a certain proportion of his lands, and which, 
in case of failure, declares those neglected lands grantable to any 
other person; though it has not, perhaps, been very strictly exe- 
cuted, has, however, had some effect. 

Secondly, in Pennsylvania there is no right of primogeniture, 
and lands, like moveables, are divided equally among all the chil- 
dren of the family. In three of the provinces of New England the 
oldest has only a double share, as in the Mosaical law. Though in 
those provinces, therefore, too great a quantity of land should 
sometimes be engrossed by a particular individual, it is likely, in 
the course of a generation or two, to be sufficiently divided again. 
In the other English colonies, indeed, the right of primogeniture 
takes place, as in the law of England. But in all the English col- 
onies the tenure of the lands, which are all held by free socage, 
facilitates alienation, and the grantee of any extensive tract of land, 
generally finds it for his interest to alienate, as fast as he can, the 
greater part of it, reserving only a small quit-rent. In the Spanish 
and Portugueze colonies, what is called the right of Majorazzo 
takes place in the succession of all those great estates to which any 
title of honour is annexed. Such estates go all to one person, and 
are in effect entailed and unalienable. The French colonies, indeed, 
are subject to the custom of Paris, which, in the inheritance of land, 
is much more favourable to the younger children than the law of 
England. But, in the French colonies, if any part of an estate, held 
by the noble tenure of chivalry and homage, is alienated, it is, for 
a limited time, subject to the right of redemption, either by the 
heir of the superior or by the heir of the family; and all the largest 
estates of the country are held by such noble tenures, which neces- 
sarily embarrass alienation. But, in a new colony, a great unculti- 
vated estate is likely to be much more speedily divided by aliena- 
tion than by succession. The plenty and cheapness of good land, it 
has already been observed,-® are the principal causes of the rapid 
prosperity of new colonies. The engrossing of land, in effect, de- 

Eds. I and 2 read “their.” 

® Jus Majoratus. Ed. i reads “mayorazzo” in the text and “mayoratus” in 
the note. 

Above, pp. 532, 533, and cp. p. 92. 


as the 
Spanish 
and Por- 
tuguese, 
but their 
institu- 
tions are 
more fa- 
vourable 
to its im- 
prove- 
ment. 

(1) The 
engross- 
ing of un- 
cultivated 
land has 
been more- 
re- 
strained. 

(2) Pri- 
mogeni- 
ture and 
entails are 
less pre- 
valent 
and 

alienation 
more fre- 
quent. 



(3) Taxes 
are more 
moderate. 


540 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

stroys this plenty and cheapness.^^ The engrossing of uncultivated 
land, besides, is the greatest obstruction to its improvement. But 
the labour that is employed in the improvement and cultivation 
of land affords the greatest and most viuable produce to the so- 
ciety. The produce of labour, in this case,^® pays not only its own 
wages, and the profit of the stock which employs it, but the rent 
of the land too upon which it is employed. The labour of the English 
colonists, therefore, being more employed in the improvement and 
cultivation of land, is likely to afford a greater and more valuable 
produce, than that of any of the other three nations, which, by the 
engrossing of land, is more or less diverted towards other employ- 
ments. 

Thirdly, the labour of the English colonists is not only likely to 
afford a greater and more valuable produce, but, in consequence of 
the moderation of their taxes, a greater proportion of this produce 
belongs to themselves, which they may store up and employ in put- 
ting into motion a still greater quantity of labour. The English col- 
onists have never yet contributed any thing towards the defence 
of the mother country, or towards the support of its civil govern- 
ment. They themselves, on the contrary, have hitherto been de- 
fended almost entirely at the expence of the mother country. But 
the expence of fleets and armies is out of all proportion greater than 
the necessary expence of civil government. The expence of their 
own civil government has always been very moderate. It has gen- 
erally been confined to what was necessary for paying competent 
salaries to the governor, to the judges, and to some other offices of 
police, and for maintaining a few of the most useful public works. 
The expence of the civil establishment of Massachusett^s Bay, be- 
fore the commencement of the present disturbances, used to be 
but about i8,ooo^. a year. That of New Hampshire and Rhode Is- 
land 3,sooZ. each. That of Connecticut 4,000^. That of New York 
and Pennsylvania 4,500^. each. That of New Jersey 1,200^. That of 
Virginia and South Carolina 8,ooo^. each. The civil establishments 
of Nova Scotia and Georgia are partly supported by an annual 
grant of parliament. But Nova Scotia pays, besides, about 7,000/. 
a year towards the public expence of the colony; and Georgia about 
2,500/. a year. All the different civil establishments in North Amer- 

^This and the preceding sentence, beginning “The plenty ” are not in ed. i. 

®®Ed. I reads “The engrossing, however, of uncultivated land, it has already 
been observed, is the greatest obstruction to its improvement and cultivation, 
and the labour.” 

^ Ed. I reads “Its produce in this case.” 

All eds. read “present” here and on p. 532, but “late” on p. 544. See above, 
p. 465, note, and below, p. 890. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 54 ^ 

ica, in short, exclusive of those of Maryland and North Carolina, 
of which no exact account has been got, did not, before the com- 
mencement of the present disturbances, cost the inhabitants above 
64,700/. a year; an ever-memorable example at how small an ex- 
pence three millions of people may not only be governed, but well 
governed. The most important part of the expence of government, 
indeed, that of defence and protection, has constantly fallen upon 
the mother country. The ceremonial too of the civil government in 
the colonies, upon the reception of a new governor, upon the open- 
ing of a new assembly, &c. though sufficiently decent, is not ac- 
companied with any expensive pomp or parade. Their ecclesiastical 
government is conducted upon a plan equally frugal. Tithes are 
unknown among them; and their clergy, who are far from being 
numerous, are maintained either by moderate stipends, or by the 
voluntary contributions of the people. The power of Spain and 
Portugal, on the contrary, derives some support from the taxes 
levied upon their colonies. France, indeed, has never drawn any 
considerable revenue from its colonies, the taxes which it levies up- 
on them being generally spent among them. But the colony govern- 
ment of all these three nations is conducted upon a much more ex- 
pensive plan, and is accompanied with a much more expensive 
ceremonial. The sums spent upon the reception of a new viceroy of 
Peru, for example, have frequently been enormous.^^ Such cere- 
monials are not only real taxes paid by the rich colonists upon those 
particular occasions, but they serve to introduce among them the 
habit of vanity and expence upon all other occasions. They are not 
only very grievous occasional taxes, but they contribute to estab- 
lish perpetual taxes of the same kind still more grievous; the ruin- 
ous taxes of private luxury and extravagance. In the colonies of 
all those three nations too, the ecclesiastical government is ex- 
tremely oppressive. Tithes take place in all of them, and are levied 
with the utmost rigour in those of Spain and Portugal. All of them 
besides are oppressed with a numerous race of mendicant friars, 
whose beggary being not only licensed, but consecrated by religion, 
is a most grievous tax upon the poor people, who are most carefully 
taught that it is a duty to give, and a very great sin to refuse them 
their charity. Over and above all this, the clergy are, in all of them, 
the greatest engrossers of land. 

Fourthly, in the disposal of their surplus produce, or of what is (4) The^ 

over and above their own consumption, the English colonies have ra e m 

The figures are evidently from the “very exact account” quoted below, p. 

Juan and Ulloa, Voyage histonque, tom. i., pp. 437-44I5 give a lurid ac- 
count of the magnificence of the ceremonial. 



nopoly of 
the 

mother 
country 
has been 
less op- 
pressive, 


since 
there has 
been no 
exclusive 
company 
with its 
interest to 
buy the 
produce 
of the col- 
onies as 
cheap as 
possible, 


nor any 
restriction 
of com- 
merce to 
a particu- 
lar port 
and to 
particular 
licensed 
ships, 


542 the wealth of nations 

been more favoured, and have been allowed a more extensive mar- 
ket, than those of any other European nation. Every European na- 
tion has endeavoured more or less to monopolize to itself the com- 
merce of its colonies, and, upon that account, has prohibited the 
ships of foreign nations from trading to them, and has prohibited 
them from importing European goods from any foreign nation. 
But the manner in which this monopoly has been exercised in dif- 
ferent nations has been very different. 

Some nations have given up the whole commerce of their col- 
onies to an exclusive company, of whom the colonies were obliged 
to buy all such European goods as they wanted, and to whom they 
were obliged to sell the whole of their own surplus produce. It was 
the interest of the company, therefore, not only to sell the former 
as dear, and to buy the latter as cheap as possible, but to buy no 
more of the latter, even at this low price, than what they could dis- 
pose of for a very high price in Europe. It was their interest, not 
only to degrade in all cases the value of the surplus produce of the 
colony, but in many cases to discourage and keep down the natural 
increase of its quantity. Of all the expedients that can well be con- 
trived to stunt the natural growth of a new colony, that of an ex- 
clusive company is undoubtedly the most effectual. This, however, 
has been the policy of Holland, though their company, in the course 
of the present century, has given up in many respects the exertion 
of their exclusive privilege. This too was the policy of Denmark 
till the reign of the late king. It has occasionally been the policy of 
France, and of late, since 1755, after it had been abandoned by all 
other nations, on account of its absurdity, it has become the policy 
of Portugal with regard at least to two of the principal provinces of 
Brazil, Pernambuco and Marannon.®® 

Other nations, without establishing an exclusive company, have 
confined the whole commerce of their colonies to a particular port 
of the mother country, from whence no ship was allowed to sail, 
but either in a fleet and at a particular season, or, if single, in con- 
sequence of a particular licence, which in most cases was very well 
paid for. This policy opened, indeed, the trade of the colonies to all 
the natives of the mother country, provided they traded from the 
proper port, at the proper season, and in the proper vessels. But as 
all the different merchants, who joined their stocks in order to fit 
out those licensed vessels, would find it for their interest to act in 
concert, the trade which was carried on in this manner would neces- 
sarily be conducted very nearly upon the same principles as that of 

®®Maranon in 1755 and Pernambuco four years later.— Raynal, Histoire 
pklosophique, Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., p. 403. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 543 

an exclusive company. The profit of those merchants would be al- 
most equally exorbitant and oppressive. The colonies would be ill 
supplied, and would be obliged both to buy very dear, and to sell 
very cheap. This, however, till within these few years, had al- 
ways been the policy of Spain, and the price of all European goods, 
accordingly, is said to have been enormous in the Spanish West 
Indies. At Quito, we are told by Ulloa, a pound of iron sold for 
about four and six-pence, and a pound of steel for about six and 
nine-pence sterling.^® But it is chiefly in order to purchase Euro- 
pean goods, that the colonies part with their own produce. The 
more, therefore, they pay for the one, the less they really get for 
the other, and the dearness of the one is the same thing with the 
cheapness of the other. The policy of Portugal is in this respect the 
same as the ancient policy of Spain, with regard to all its colonies, 
except Pernambuco and Marannon, and with regard to these it has 
lately adopted a still worse. 

Other nations leave the trade of their colonies free to all their 
subjects, who may carry it on from all the different ports of the 
mother country, and who have occasion for no other licence than 
the common dispatches of the customhouse. In this case the num- 
ber and dispersed situation of the different traders renders it im- 
possible for them to enter into any general combination, and their 
competition is sufficient to hinder them from making very ex- 
orbitant profits. Under so liberal a policy the colonies are enabled 
both to sell their own produce and to buy the goods of Europe at a 
reasonable price. But since the dissolution of the Plymouth com- 
pany, when our colonies were but in their infancy, this has always 
been the policy of England. It has generally too been that of France, 
and has been uniformly so since the dissolution of what, in Eng- 
land, is commonly called their Mississippi company. The profits of 
the trade, therefore, which France and England carry on with their 
colonies, though no doubt somewhat higher than if the competition 
was free to all other nations, are, however, by no means exorbitant; 
and the price of European goods accordingly is not extravagantly 
high in the greater part of the colonies of either of those nations. 

In the exportation of their own surplus produce too, it is only 
with regard to certain commodities that the colonies of Great Brit- 
ain are confined to the market of the mother country. These com- 
modities having been enumerated in the act of navigation and in 

Ed. I reads “This, however, has.” ®®Ed. i reads “said to be.” 

®®Iron sometimes at loo ecus the quintal and steel at 150. — Juan and Ul- 
loa, Voyage historique, tom. i., p. 252. 

Ed. I reads “the same as that of Spain ” 


but free 
dom for 
every 
subject tc 
trade 
with 
every 
port in 
the 

mother 

country, 


and free- 
dom to 
export 
every- 
thing but 



the enu- 
merated 
commodi- 
ties to 
other 
places be- 
sides the 
mother 
country. 

Some 
most im- 
portant 
produc- 
tions are 
not enu- 
merated, 

as grain, 
timber, 


cattle, 


fish, 


544 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

some other subsequent acts, have upon that account been called 
enumerated commodities?^ The rest are called non-enumerated; 
and may be exported directly to other countries, provided it is in 
British or Plantation ships, of which the owners and three-fourths 
of the mariners are British subjects. 

Among the non-enumerated commodities are some of the most 
important productions of America and the West Indies; grain of all 
sorts, lumber, salt provisions, fish, sugar, and rum. 

Grain is naturally the first and principal object of the culture of 
all new colonies. By allowing them a very extensive market for it, 
the law encourages them to extend this culture much beyond the 
consumption of a thinly inhabited country, and thus to provide be- 
forehand an ample subsistence for a continually increasing popula- 
tion. 

In a country quite covered with wood, where timber conse- 
quently is of little or no value, the expence of clearing the ground 
is the principal obstacle to improvement. By allowing the colonies 
a very extensive market for their lumber, the law endeavours to 
facilitate improvement by raising the price of a commodity which 
would otherwise be of little value, and thereby enabling them to 
make some profit of what would otherwise be mere expence. 

In a country neither half-peopled nor half cultivated, cattle 
naturally multiply beyond the consumption of the inhabitants, and 
are often upon that account of little or no value. But it is necessary, 
it has already been shewn,^^ that the price of cattle should bear a 
certain proportion to that of corn before the greater part of the 
lands of any country can be improved. By allowing to American 
cattle, in all shapes, dead and alive, a very extensive market, the 
law endeavours to raise the value of a commodity of which the high 
price is so very essential to improvement. The good effects of this 
liberty, however, must be somewhat diminished by the 4th of 
George III. c. 15. which puts hides and skins among the enum- 
erated commodities, and thereby tends to reduce the value of Amer- 
ican cattle. 

To increase the shipping and naval power of Great Britain, by 
the extension of the fisheries of our colonies, is an object which the 
legislature seems to have had almost constantly in view. Those 
fisheries, upon this account, have had all the encouragement which 
freedom can give them, and they have flourished accordingly. The 
New England fishery in particular was, before the late disturb- 

®®The commodities originally enumerated in 12 Car. II., c. 18, § 18, were 
sugar, tobacco-cotton-wool, indigo, ginger, fustic and other dyeing woods. 

Above, pp. 148, 149, 219-221. " See above, p. 540, note 30. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 545 

ances, one of the most important, perhaps, in the world. The whale- 
fishery which, notwithstanding an extravagant bounty, is in Great 
Britain carried on to so little purpose, that in the opinion of many 
people (which I do not, however, pretend to warrant) the whole 
produce does not much exceed the value of the bounties which are 
annually paid for it, is in New England carried on without any 
bounty to a very great extent. Fish is one of the principal articles 
with which the North Americans trade to Spain, Portugal, and the 
Mediterranean. 

Sugar was originally an enumerated commodity which could be 
exported only to Great Britain. But in 1731, upon a representation 
of the sugar-planters, its exportation was permitted to all parts of 
the world.*^^ The restrictions,^^ however, with which this liberty 
was granted, joined to the high price of sugar in Great Britain, 
have rendered it, in a great measure, ineffectual. Great Britain and 
her colonies still continue to be almost the sole market for all the 
sugar produced in the British plantations. Their consumption in- 
creases so fast, that, though in consequence of the increasing im- 
provement of Jamaica, as well as of the Ceded Islands,^^ the im- 
portation of sugar has increased very greatly within these twenty 
years, the exportation to foreign countries is said to be not much 
greater than before. 

Rum is a very important article in the trade which the Ameri- 
cans carry on to the coast of Africa, from which they bring back 
negroe slaves in return. 

If the whole surplus produce of America in grain of all sorts, in 
salt provisions, and in fish, had been put into the enumeration, and 
thereby forced into the market of Great Britain, it would have 
interfered too much with the produce of the industry of our own 
people. It was probably not so much from any regard to the in- 
terest of America, as from a jealousy of this interference, that those 
important commodities have not only been kept out of the enum- 
eration, but that the importation into Great Britain of all grain, 
except rice, and of salt provisions, has, in the ordinary state of the 
law, been prohibited. 

The non-enumerated commodities could originally be exported 
to all parts of the world. Lumber and rice, having been once put 

There seems to be some mistake here. The true date is apparently 1739, 
under the Act 12 Geo. IL, c. 30. 

Ships not going to places south of Cape Finisterre were compelled to call 
at some port in Great Britain. 

Gamier, in his note to this passage, tom. iii., p. 323, points out that the 
islands ceded by the peace of Paris in 1763 were only Grenada and the Gren- 
adines, but that the term here includes the other islands won during the war, 
St. Vincent, Dominica and Tobago, which are mentioned below, p. 895. 


sugar, 


and rum. 


Grain, 
meat and 
fish 
would 
have 

competed 

too 

strongly 
with Brit- 
ish pro- 
duce if 
forced 
into the 
British 
market. 



Originally 
non-enu- 
merated 
commodi- 
ties could 
be export- 
ed to any 
part of 
the world 
Recently 
they have 
been con- 
fined to 
countries 
south of 
Cape 

Finisterre. 

The enu- 
merated 
commodi- 
ties are 
(i) com- 
modities 
not pro- 
duced at 
all in the 
mother 
country, 
and (2) 
commodi- 
ties of 
which 
only a 
small part 
of the 
supply is 
produced 
in the 
mother 
country. 


On the 
importa- 


546 the wealth of nations 

into the enumeration, when they were afterwards taken out of it, 
were confined, as to the European market, to the countries that 
lie south of Cape Finisterre.*^^ By the 6th of George III. c. 52. all 
non-enumerated commodities were subjected to the like restriction. 
The parts of Europe which lie south of Cape Finisterre, are not 
manufacturing countries, and we were less jealous of the colony 
ships carrying home from them any manufactures which could 
interfere with our own. 

The enumerated commodities are of two sorts: first, such as are 
either the peculiar produce of America, or as cannot be produced, 
or at least are not produced, in the mother country. Of this kind 
are, molasses, coffee, cacao-nuts, tobacco, pimento, ginger, whale- 
fins, raw silk, cotton-wool, beaver, and other peltry of America, 
indigo, fustic, and other dying woods: secondly, such as are not the 
peculiar produce of America, but which are and may be produced 
in the mother country, though not in such quantities as to supply 
the greater part of her demand, which is principally supplied from 
foreign countries. Of this kind are all naval stores, masts, yards, 
and bowsprits, tar, pitch, and turpentine, pig and bar iron, copper 
ore, hides and skins, pot and pearl ashes. The largest importation 
of commodities of the first kind could not discourage the growth 
or interfere with the sale of any part of the produce of the mother 
country. By confining them to the home market, our merchants, 
it was expected, would not only be enabled to buy them cheaper in 
the Plantations, and consequently to sell them with a better profit 
at home, but to establish between the Plantations and foreign coun- 
tries an advantageous carrying trade, of which Great Britain was 
necessarily to be the center or emporium, as the European country 
into which those commodities were first to be imported. The im- 
portation of commodities of the second kind might be so managed 
too, it was supposed, as to interfere, not with the sale of those of 
the same kind which were produced at home, but with that of those 
which were imported from foreign countries; because, by means of 
proper duties, they might be rendered always somewhat dearer 
than the former, and yet^a good deal cheaper than the latter. By 
confining such commodities to the home market, therefore, it was 
proposed to discourage the produce, not of Great Britain, but of 
some foreign countries with which the balance of trade was believed 
to be unfavourable to Great Britain. 

The prohibition of exporting from the colonies, to any other 
cpuntry but Great Britain, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch, 

I 

Rice was put in by 3 and 4 Ann, c. 5, and taken out by 3 Geo. II , c. 28 ; 
timber was taken out by 3 Geo. III., c. 45. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 547 

and turpentine, naturally tended to lower the price of timber in the 
colonies, and consequently to increase the expence of clearing their 
lands, the principal obstacle to their improvement. But about the 
beginning of the present century, in 1703, the pitch and tar com- 
pany of Sweden endeavoured to raise the price of their commodi- 
ties to Great Britain, by prohibiting their exportation, except in 
their own ships, at their own price, and in such quantities as they 
thought proper In order to counteract this notable piece of mer- 
cantile policy, and to render herself as much as possible independ- 
ent, not only of Sweden, but of all the other northern powers, 
Great Britain gave a bounty upon the importation of naval stores 
from America^® and the effect of this bounty was to raise the 
price of timber in America, much more than the confinement to the 
home market could lower it; and as both regulations were enacted 
at the same time, their joint effect was rather to encourage than to 
discourage the clearing of land in America. 

Though pig and bar iron too have been put among the enumer- 
ated commodities, yet as, when imported from America, they are 
exempted from considerable duties to which they are subject when 
imported from any other country, the one part of the regulation 
contributes more to encourage the erection of furnaces in America, 
than the other to discourage it. There is no manufacture which oc- 
casions so great a consumption of wood as a furnace, or which can 
contribute so much to the clearing of a country over-grown with it. 

The tendency of some of these regulations to raise the value of 
timber in America, and thereby to faciliate the clearing of the land, 
was neither, perhaps, intended nor understood by the legislature. 
Though their beneficial effects, however, have been in this respect 
accidental, they have not upon that account been less real. 

The most perfect freedom of trade is permitted between the Brit- 
ish colonies of America and the West Indies, both in the enumer- 
ated and in the non-enumerated commodities. Those colonies are 
now become so populous and thriving, that each of them finds in 
some of the others a great and extensive market for every part of its 
produce. All of them taken together, they make a great internal 
market for the produce of one another. 

The liberality of England, however, towards the trade of her col- 
onies has been confined chiefly to what concerns the market for 
their produce, either in its rude state, or in what may be called the 
very first stage of manufacture. The more advanced or more re- 

^ Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1703 

Details arc given below, pp. 609, 610, in a chapter not contained in eds. 
I and 2. 

23 Geo. IL, c. 29. 


tion of 
naval 
stores to 
Great 
Britain a 
bounty 
was given. 


American 
pig iron is 
exempt 
from 
duty. 


These 
regula- 
tions have 
raised the 
value of 
timber 
and thus 
helped to 
clear the 
country. 

Freedom 
of trade 
prevails 
between 
the Brit- 
ish Amer- 
ican colo- 
nies and 
the Brit- 
ish West 
Indies. 



British 
liberality 
does not 
extend to 
refined 
manufac- 
tures. 

Manufac- 
tured 
sugar is 
subject to 
heavy 
duty. 


Steel fur- 
naces and 
slit-mills 
may not 
be erected 
in the 
colonies. 


Hats, 
wools 
and wool- 
len goods 
produced 
in Amer- 
ica may 
not be 


54S the wealth of nations 

fined manufactures even of the colony produce, the merchants and 
manufactures of Great Britain chuse to reserve to themselves, and 
have prevailed upon the legislature to prevent their establishment 
in the colonies, sometimes by high duties, and sometimes by abso- 
lute prohibitions. 

While, for example, Muskovado sugars from the British planta- 
tions, pay upon importation only 6 s. ^d. the hundred weight; white 
sugars pay il. is. id.\ and refined, either double or single, in loaves 
4^. 2^. 5^^. When those high duties were imposed. Great Britain 
was the sole, and she still continues to be the principal market to 
which the sugars of the British colonies could be exported. They 
amounted, therefore, to a prohibition, at first of claying or refining 
sugar for any foreign market, and at present of claying or refining 
it for the market, which takes off, perhaps, more than nine-tenths 
of the whole produce. The manufacture of claying or refining su- 
gar accordingly, though it has flourished in all the sugar colonies 
of France, has been little cultivated in any of those of England, 
except for the market of the colonies themselves. While Grenada 
was in the hands of the French, there was a refinery of sugar, by 
claying at least, upon almost every plantation. Since it fell into 
those of the English, almost all works of this kind have been given 
up, and there are at present, October 1773 , 1 am assured, not above 
two or three remaining in the island. At present, however, by an 
indulgence of the custom-house, clayed or refined sugar, if reduced 
from loaves into powder, is commonly imported as Muskovado. 

While Great Britain encourages in America the manufactures of 
pig and bar iron, by exempting them from duties to which the like 
commodities are subject when imported from any other country, 
she imposes an absolute prohibition upon the erection of steel fur- 
naces and slit-mills in any of her American plantations.^^ She will 
not suffer her colonists to work in those more refined manufactures 
even for their own consumption; but insists upon their purchasing 
of her merchants and manufacturers all goods of this kind which 
they have occasion for. 

She prohibits the exportation from one province to another by 
water, and even the carriage by land upon horseback or in a cart, 
of hats, of wools and woollen goods, of the produce of America; 
a regulation which effectually prevents the establishment of any 
manufacture of such commodities for distant sale, and confines the 
industry of her colonists in this way to such coarse and household 

^ 23 Geo. II,, c. 29. Anderson, Commerce j a.d. 1750. 

“Hats under 5 Geo. IL, c. 22; wools under 10 and ii W. III., c. 10. See 
Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1732 and 1699. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 549 

manufactures, as a private family commonly makes for its own 
use, or for that of some of its neighbours in the same province. 

To prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they 
can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their 
stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous 
to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of 
mankind. Unjust, however, as such prohibitions may be, they have 
not hitherto been very hurtful to the colonies. Land is still so cheap, 
and, consequently, labour so dear among them, that they can im- 
port from the mother country, almost all the more refined or more 
advanced manufactures cheaper than they could make them for 
themselves. Though they had not, therefore, been prohibited from 
establishing such manufactures, yet in their present state of im- 
provement, a regard to their own interest would, probably, have 
prevented them from doing so. In their present state of improve- 
ment, those prohibitions, perhaps, without cramping their industry, 
or restraining it from any employment to which it would have gone 
of its own accord, are only impertinent badges of slavery imposed 
upon them, without any sufficient reason, by the groundless jeal- 
ousy of the merchants and manufacturers of the mother country. 
In a more advanced state they might be really oppressive and in- 
supportable. 

Great Britain too, as she confines to her own market some of the 
most important productions of the colonies, so in compensation she 
gives to some of them an advantage in that market; sometimes by 
imposing higher duties upon the like productions when imported 
from other countries, and sometimes by giving bounties upon their 
importation from the colonies. In the first way she gives an ad- 
vantage in the home-market to the sugar, tobacco, and iron of her 
own colonies, and in the second to their raw silk, to their hemp and 
flax, to their indigo, to their naval-stores, and to their building-tim- 
ber.^^ This second way of encouraging the colony produce by boun- 
ties upon importation, is, so far as I have been able to learn, pecu- 
liar to Great Britain. The first is not. Portugal does not content her- 
self with imposing higher duties upon the importation of tobacco 
from any other country, but prohibits it under the severest penal- 
ties. 

With regard to the importation of goods from Europe, England 
has likewise dealt more liberally with her colonies than any other 
nation. 

Great Britain allows a part, almost always the half, generally a 

Details are given below, pp. 609-612, in a chapter which was not in eds. 
I and 2. 


carried in 
bulk from 
province 
to pro- 
vince. 

Such pro- 
hibitions, 
though a 
violation 
of sacred 
rights, 
have not 
as yet 
been very 
hurtful. 


The im- 
portation 
into ' 
Great 
Britain of 
various 
colonial 
produc- 
tions is 
encour- 
aged 
either by 
abate- 
ment of 
duties or 
by 

bounties. 


In regard 
to im- 
ports 
from 
Europe 



the Brit- 
ish colo- 
nies have 
had more 
liberal 
treatment 
than 
those of 
other 
countries, 


draw- 
backs be- 
ing al- 
lowed, 


owing to 
the advice 
of inter- 
ested 
mer- 
chants. 


550 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

larger portion, and sometimes the whole of the duty which is paid 
upon the importation of foreign goods, to be drawn back upon 
their exportation to any foreign country.®^ No independent foreign 
country, it was easy to foresee, would receive them if they came to 
it loaded with the heavy duties to which almost all foreign goods 
are subjected on their importation into Great Britain. Unless, 
therefore, some part of those duties was drawn back upon exporta- 
tion, there was an end of the carrying trade; a trade so much fa- 
voured by the mercantile system. 

Our colonies, however, are by no means independent foreign 
countries; and Great Britain having assumed to herself the exclu- 
sive right of supplying them with all goods from Europe, might 
have forced them (in the same manner as other countries have done 
their colonies) to receive such goods, loaded with all the same du- 
ties which they paid in the mother country. But, on the contrary, 
till 1763, the same drawbacks were paid upon the exportation of 
the greater part of foreign goods to our colonies as to any independ- 
ent foreign country. In 1763, indeed, by the 4th of Geo. III. c. 15. 
this indulgence was a good deal abated, and it was enacted, “That 
no part of the duty called the old subsidy should be drawn back 
for any goods of the growth, production, or manufacture of Eu- 
rope or the East Indies, which should be exported from this king- 
dom to any British colony or plantation in America; wines, white 
callicoes and muslins excepted.” Before this law, many different 
sorts of foreign goods might have been bought cheaper in the plan- 
tations than in the mother country; and some may still. 

Of the greater part of the regulations concerning the colony 
trade, the merchants who carry it on, it must be observed, have 
been the principal advisers. We must not wonder, therefore, if, in 
the greater part of them, their interest has been more considered 
than either that of the colonies or that of the mother country. In 
their exclusive privilege of supplying the colonies with all the goods 
which they wanted from Europe, and of purchasing all such parts 
of their surplus produce as could not interfere with any of the 
trades which they themselves carried on at home, the interest of 
the colonies was sacrificed to the interest of those merchants. In 
allowing the same drawbacks upon the re-exportation of the greater 
part of European and East India goods to the colonies, as upon 
their re-exportation to any independent country, the interest of the 
mother country was sacrificed to it, even according to the mercan- 

“ Above, pp. 466-470 

The quotation is not quite verbatim. The provision is referred to above, 
p. 470, where, however, see note. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 55i 

tile ideas of that interest. It was for the interest of the merchants 
to pay as little as possible for the foreign goods which they sent to 
the colonies, and consequently, to get back as much as possible of 
the duties which they advanced upon their importation into Great 
Britain. They might thereby be enabled to sell in the colonies, 
either the same quantity of goods with a greater profit, or a greater 
quantity with the same profit, and, consequently, to gain some- 
thing either in the one way or the other. It was, likewise, for the 
interest of the colonies to get all such goods as cheap and in as 
great abundance as possible. But this might not always be for the 
interest of the mother country. She might frequently suffer both in 
her revenue, by giving back a great part of the duties which had 
been paid upon the importation of such goods; and m her manufac- 
tures, by being undersold in the colony market, in consequence of 
the easy terms upon which foreign manufactures could be carried 
thither by means of those drawbacks. The progress of the linen 
manufacture of Great Britain, it is commonly said, has been a good 
deal retarded by the drawbacks upon the re-exportation of Ger- 
man linen to the American colonies. 

But though the policy of Great Britain with regard to the trade 
of her colonies has been dictated by the same mercantile spirit as 
that of other nations, it has, however, upon the whole, been less 
illiberal and oppressive than that of any of them. 

In every thing, except their foreign trade, the liberty of the Eng- 
lish colonists to manage their own affairs their own way is com- 
plete. It is in every respect equal to that of their fellow-citizens at 
home, and is secured in the same manner, by an assembly of the 
representatives of the people, who claim the sole right of imposing 
taxes for the support of the colony government. The authority of 
this assembly over-awes the executive power, and neither the mean- 
est nor the most obnoxious colonist, as long as he obeys the law, 
has any thing to fear from the resentment, either of the governor, 
or of any other civil or military officer in the province. The colony 
assemblies, though like the house of commons in England, they 
are not always a very equal representation of the people, yet they 
approach more nearly to that character; and^® as the executive 
power either has not the means to corrupt them, or, on account of 
the support which it receives from the mother country, is not under 
the necessity of doing so, they are perhaps in general more influ- 
enced by the inclinations of their constituents. The councils, which, 
in the colony legislatures, correspond to the house of lords in 

®*Ed. I does not contain the words “they approach more nearly to that 
character; and.” 


Except in 

regard to 

foreign 

trade the 

English 

colonies 

have 

complete 

liberty. 



552 


The abso- 
lute gov- 
ernments 
of Spain, 
of Portu- 
gal, and 
in a less 
degree of 
France, 
are even 
more vio- 
lent in the 
colonies 
than at 
home. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Great Britain, are not composed of an hereditary nobility. In some 
of the colonies, as in three of the governments of New England, 
those councils are not appointed by the king, but chosen by the rep- 
resentatives of the people. In none of the English colonies is there 
any hereditary nobility. In all of them, indeed, as in all other free 
countries, the descendant of an old colony family is more respected 
than an upstart of equal merit and fortune: but he is only more 
respected, and he has no privileges by which he can be trouble- 
some to his neighbours. Before the commencement of the present 
disturbances, the colony assemblies had not only the legislative, 
but a part of the executive power. In Connecticut and Rhode Is- 
land, they elected the governor.^^ In the other colonies they ap- 
pointed the revenue officers who collected the taxes imposed by 
those respective assemblies, to whom those officers were immedi- 
ately responsible. There is more equality, therefore, among the 
English colonists than among the inhabitants of the mother coun- 
try. Their manners are more republican, and their governments, 
those of three of the provinces of New England in particular, have 
hitherto been more republican too. 

The absolute governments of Spain, Portugal, and France, on 
the contrary, take place in their colonies; and the discretionary 
powers which such governments commonly delegate to all their in- 
jEerior officers are, on account of the great distance, naturally exer- 
cised there with more than ordinary violence. Under all absolute 
governments there is more liberty in the capital than in any other 
part of the country. The sovereign himself can never have either 
interest or inclination to pervert the order of justice, or to oppress 
the great body of the people. In the capital his presence over-awes 
more or less all his inferior officers, who in the remoter provinces, 
from whence the complaints of the people are less likely to reach 
him, can exercise their tyranny with much more safety. But the 
European colonies in America are more remote than the most dis- 
tant provinces of the greatest empires which had ever been known 
before. The government of the English colonies is perhaps the only 
one which, sincelhe world began, could give perfect security to the 
inhabitants of so very distant a province. The administration of 
the French colonies, however, has always been conducted with more 
gentleness and moderation than that of the Spanish and Portu- 
guese. This superiority of conduct is suitable both to the character 


“The Board of Trade and Plantations, in a report to the House of Com- 
mons in 1732, insisted on this democratic character of the government of some 
of the colonies, and mentioned the election of governor by Connecticut and 
Rhode Island: the report is quoted in Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1732. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 553 

of the French nation, and to what forms the character of every na- 
tion, the nature of their government, which, though arbitrary and 
violent in comparison with that of Great Britain, is legal and free 
in comparison with those of Spain and Portugal. 

It is in the progress of the North American colonies, however, 
that the superiority of the English policy chiefly appears. The 
progress of the sugar colonies of France has been at least equal, 
perhaps superior, to that of the greater part of those of England; 
and yet the sugar colonies of England enjoy a free government 
nearly of the same kind with that which takes place in her colonies 
of North America. But the sugar colonies of France are not dis- 
couraged, like those of England, from refining their own sugar; 
and, what is of still greater importance, the genius of their govern- 
ment naturally introduces a better management of their negro 
slaves. 

In all European colonies the culture of the sugar-cane is carried 
on by negro slaves. The constitution of those who have been born 
in the temperate climate of Europe could not, it is supposed, sup- 
port the labour of digging the ground under the burning sun of the 
West Indies; and the culture of the sugar-cane, as it is managed at 
present, is all hand labour, though, in the opinion of many, the drill 
plough might be introduced into it with great advantage. But, as 
the profit and success of the cultivation which is carried on by 
means of cattle, depend very much upon the good management of 
those cattle; so the profit and-success of that which is carried on by 
slaves, must depend equally upon the good management of those 
slaves; and in the good management of their slaves the French 
planters, I think it is generally allowed, are superior to the English. 
The law, so far as it gives some weak protection to the slave against 
the violence of his master, is likely to be better executed in a colony 
where the government is in a great measure arbitrary, than in one 
where it is altogether free. In every country where the unfortunate 
law of slavery is established, the magistrate, when he protects the 
slave, intermeddles in some measure in the management of the 
private property of the master; and, in a free country, where the 
master is perhaps either a member of the colony assembly, or an 
elector of such a member, he dare not do this but with the greatest 
caution and circumspection. The respect which he is obliged to pay 
to the master, renders it more difficult for him to protect the slave. 
But in a country where the government is in a great measure arbi- 
trary, where it is usual for the magistrate to intermeddle even in 
the management of the private property of individuals, and to send 
them, perhaps, a lettre de cachet if they do not manage it according 


The sugar 
colonies 
of France 
are more 
prosper- 
ous than 
the Eng- 
lish be- 
cause they 
are not 
discour- 
aged from 
refining, 
and slaves 
are better 
managed, 

absolute 
govern- 
ment be- 
ing more 
favour- 
able to 
the slaves 
than re- 
publican, 



as may be 
seen in 
Roman 
history. 


The su- 
periority 
of the 
French 
sugar 
colonies is 
the more 
remark- 
able inas- 
much as 
they have 
accumu- 
lated their 
own 
stock. 


554 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

to his liking, it is much easier for him to give some protection to the 
slave; and common humanity naturally disposes him to do so. The 
protection of the magistrate renders the slave less contemptible in 
the eyes of his master, who is thereby induced to consider him with 
more regard, and to treat him with more gentleness. Gentle usage 
renders the slave not only more faithful, but more intelligent, and 
therefore, upon a double account, more useful. He approaches more 
to the condition of a free servant, and may possess some degree of 
integrity and attachment to his master’s interest, virtues which fre- 
quently belong to free servants, but which never can belong to a 
slave, who is treated as slaves commonly are in countries where the 
master is perfectly free and secure. 

That the condition of a slave is better under an arbitrary than 
under a free government, is, I believe, supported by the history of 
all ages and nations. In the Roman history, the first time we read 
of the magistrate interposing to protect the slave from the violence 
of his master, is under the emperors. When Vedius Pollio, in the 
presence of Augustus, ordered one of his slaves, who had commit- 
ted a slight fault, to be cut into pieces and thrown into his fish-pond 
in order to feed his fishes, the emperor commanded him, with indig- 
nation, to emancipate immediately, not only that slave, but all the 
others that belonged to him.^'’^ Under the republic no magistrate 
could have had authority enough to protect the slave, much less to 
punish the master. 

The stock, it is to be observed, which has improved the sugar 
colonies of France, particularly the great colony of St. Domingo, 
has been raised almost entirely from the gradual improvement and 
cultivation of those colonies. It has been almost altogether the pro- 
duce of the soil and of the industry of the colonists, or, what 
comes to the same thing, the price of that produce gradually accu- 
mulated by good management, and employed in raising a still 
greater produce. But the stock which has improved and cultivated 
the sugar colonies of England has, a great part of it, been sent out 
from England, and has by no means been altogether the produce of 
the soil and industry of the colonists.''*'^ The prosperity of the Eng- 

^ “ The story is told in the same way in Lectures, p. 97, but Seneca, De ira, 
lib. iii., cap. 40, and Dio Cassius, Hist., lib. liv., cap. 23, say, not that Augustus 
ordered all the slaves to be emancipated, but that he ordered all the goblets 
on the table to be broken. Seneca says the offending slave was emancipated. 
Dio does not mention emancipation. 

“ Ed. I reads “and ihdustry.” 

“’^The West India merchants and planters asserted, in 1775, that there was 
capital worth £60,000,000 in the sugar colonies and that half of this belonged 
to residents in Great Britain.— See the Continuation of Anderson’s Commerce, 
A.D. 1775. 



PROSPERITY OF NEW COLONIES 555 

lish sugar colonies has been, in a great measure, owing to the great 
riches of England, of which a part has overflowed, if one may say 
so, upon those colonies. But the prosperity of the sugar colonies of 
France has been entirely owing to the good conduct of the colonists, 
which must therefore have had some superiority over that of the 
English; and this superiority has been remarked in nothing so 
much as in the good management of their slaves. 

Such have been the general outlines of the policy of the different 
European nations with regard to their colonies. 

The policy of Europe, therefore, has very little to boast of, 
either in the original establishment, or, so far as concerns their in- 
ternal government,®® in the subsequent prosperity of the colonies 
of America. 

Folly and injustice seem to have been the principles which pre- 
sided over and directed the first project of establishing those col- 
onies; the folly of hunting after gold and silver mines, and the in- 
justice of coveting the possession of a country whose harmless na- 
tives, far from having ever injured the people of Europe, had re- 
ceived the first adventurers with every mark of kindness and hos- 
pitality. 

The adventurers, indeed, who formed some of the latter estab- 
lishments, joined, to the chimerical project of finding gold and sil- 
ver mines, other motives more reasonable and more laudable; but 
even these motives do very little honour to the policy of Europe. 

The English puritans, restrained at home, fled for freedom to 
America, and established there the four governments of New Eng- 
land. The English catholics, treated with much greater injustice,®® 
established that of Maryland; the Quakers, that of Pennsylvania. 
The Portugueze Jews, persecuted by the inquisition, stript of their 
fortunes, and banished to Brazil, introduced, by their example, 
some sort of order and industry among the transported felons and 
strumpets, by whom that colony was originally peopled, and taught 
them the culture of the sugar-cane.®^ Upon all these different oc- 
casions it was, not the wisdom and policy, but the disorder and in- 
justice of the European governments, which peopled and cultivated 
America. 

In effectuating some of the most important of these establish- 
ments, the different governments of Europe had as little merit as 
in projecting them. The conquest of Mexico was the project, not of 

^ Eds. I and 2 do not contain the words “so far as concerns their internal 
government.” 

“ Ed. I reads “persecuted.” Ed. i reads “with equal injustice ” 

“^Raynal, Histoire philosophique, Amsterdam ed., 1773, tom. iii., pp. 323, 
324, 326, 327. Justamond’s English trans., vol. ii., p. 442. 


The 

policy of 
Europe 
has done 
nothing 
for the 
prosperity 
of the 
colonies. 

Folly and 
injustice 
directed 
the first 
project. 


The more 
respect- 
able ad- 
venturers 
of later 
times 
were sent 
out by 
the dis- 
order and 
injustice 
of Euro- 
pean gov- 
ernments. 


To the ac- 
tual 

establish- 
ment of 



the colo- 
nies the 
govern- 
ments of 
Europe 
contribut- 
ed little, 


and dis- 
couraged 
rather 
than en- 
couraged 
them 
after they 
were 
estab- 
lished. 


Europe 
has done 
nothing 
except 
provide 
the men 
who 
founded 
the colo- 
nies. 


556 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the council of Spain, but of a governor of Cuba; and it was ef- 
fectuated by the spirit of the bold adventurer to whom it was en- 
trusted, in spite of every thing which that governor, who soon re- 
pented of having trusted such a person, could do to thwart it. The 
conquerors of Chili and Peru, and of almost all the other Spanish 
settlements upon the continent of America, carried out with them 
no other public encouragement, but a general permission to make 
settlements and conquests in the name of the king of Spain. Those 
adventures were all at the private risk and expence of the adventur- 
ers. The government of Spain contributed scarce any thing to any 
of them. That of England contributed as little towards effectuating 
the establishment of some of its most important colonies in North 
America. 

When those establishments were effectuated, and had become so 
considerable as to attract the attention of the mother country, the 
first regulations which she made with regard to them had always in 
view to secure to herself the monopoly of their commerce; to con- 
fine their market, and to enlarge her own at their expence, and, 
consequently, rather to damp and discourage, than to quicken and 
forward the course of their prosperity. In the different ways in 
which this monopoly has been exercised, consists one of the most 
essential differences in the policy of the different European nations 
with regard to their colonies. The best of them all, that of England, 
is only somewhat less illiberal and oppressive than that of any of 
the rest. 

In what way, therefore, has the policy of Europe contributed 
either to the first establishment, or to the present grandeur of the 
colonies of America? In one way, and in one way only, it has con- 
tributed a good deal. Magna virum Mater! It bred and formed 
the men who were capable of atchieving such great actions, and of 
laying the foundation of so great an empire; and there is no other 
quarter of the world of which the policy is capable of forming, or 
has ever actually and in fact formed such men. The colonies owe 
to the policy of Europe the education and great views of their ac- 
tive and enterprising founders; and some of the greatest and most 
important of them, so far as concerns their internal government,^^ 
owe to it scarce any thing else. 

“Velasquez. “Cortez. 

"'“Salve magna parens frugum, Saturnia tellus, Magna virum.”--VirgiI, 
ii., 173-174. 

® Eds. I and 2 do not contain the words “so far as concerns their internal 
government.” Cp. above, p. 555, note 58. 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 557 

Part Third 

Of the Advantages which Europe has derived from the Discovery 
of America f and from that of a Passage to the East Indies by 
the Cape of Good Hope 

Such are the advantages which the colonies of America have de- 
rived from the policy of Europe, 

What are those which Europe has derived from the discovery and 
colonization of America? 

Those advantages may be divided, first, into the general ad- 
vantages which Europe, considered as one great country, has de- 
rived from those great events; and, secondly, into the particular 
advantages which each colonizing country has derived from the 
colonies which particularly belong to it, in consequence of the au- 
thority or dominion which it exercises over them. 

The general advantages which Europe, considered as one great 
country, has derived from the discovery and colonization of Amer- 
ica, consists, first, in the increase of its enjoyments; and secondly, 
in the augmentation of its industry. 

The surplus produce of America, imported into Europe, furn- 
ishes the inhabitants of this great continent with a variety of com- 
modities which they could not otherwise have possessed, some for 
conveniency and use, some for pleasure, and some for ornament, 
and thereby contributes to increase their enjoyments. 

The discovery and colonization of America, it will readily be al- 
lowed, have contributed to augment the industry, first, of all the 
countries which trade to it directly; such as Spain, Portugal, 
France, and England; and, secondly, of all those which, without 
trading to it directly, send, through the medium of other countries, 
goods to it of their own produce; such as Austrian Flanders, and 
some provinces of Germany, which, through the medium of the 
countries before mentioned, send to it a considerable quantity of 
linen and other goods. All such countries have evidently gained a 
more extensive market for their surplus produce, and must con- 
sequently have been encouraged to increase its quantity. 

But, that those great events should likewise have contributed to 
encourage the industry of countries, such as Hungary and Poland, 
which may never, perhaps, have sent a single commodity of their 
own produce to America, is not, perhaps, altogether so evident. 
That those events have doiH^ so, however, cannot be doubted. 


The ad- 
vantages 
derived 
by 

Europe 
from 
America 
are (i) 
the ad- 
vantages 
of Europe 
in general, 
and ( 2 ) 
the ad- 
vantages 
of the 
particular 
countries 
which 
have colo- 
nies. 

(i) The 
general 
advan- 
tages to 
Europe 
are, 

(a) an in- 
crease of 
enjoy- 
ments, 

(&) an 
aug- 
mentation 
of indus- 
try not 
only in 
the coun- 
tries 
which 
trade 
with 
America 
directly, 



but also 
in other 
countries 
which do 
not send 
their pro- 
duce to 
America, 


or even 
receive 
any pro- 
duce from 
America. 


The ex- 
clusive 
trade of 
the 

mother 
countries 
reduces 
the en- 
joyments 
and in- 


5S8 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Some part of the produce of America is consumed in Hungary and 
Poland, and there is some demand there for the sugar, chocolate, 
and tobacco, of that new quarter of the world. But those commodi- 
ties must be purchased with something which is either the produce 
of the industry of Hungary and Poland, or with something which 
had been pur(±ased with some part of that produce. Those com- 
modities of America are new values, new equivalents, introduced 
into Hungary and Poland to be exchanged there for the surplus 
produce of those countries. By being carried thither they create a 
new and more extensive market for that surplus produce. They 
raise its value, and thereby contribute to encourage its increase. 
Though no part of it may ever be carried to America, it may be 
carried to other countries which purchase it with a part of their 
share of the surplus produce of America; and it may find a market 
by means of the circulation of that trade which was originally put 
into motion by the surplus produce of America. 

Those great events may even have contributed to increase the 
enjoyments, and to augment the industry of countries which, not 
only never sent any commodities to America, but never received 
any from it. Even such countries may have received a greater 
abundance of other commodities from countries of which the sur- 
plus produce had been augmented by means of the American trade. 
This greater abundance, as it must necessarily have increased their 
enjoyments, so it must likewise have augmented their industry. A 
greater number of new equivalents of some kind or other must have 
been presented to them to be exchanged for the surplus produce of 
that industry. A more extensive market must have been created for 
that surplus produce, so as to raise its value, and thereby encour- 
age its increase. The mass of commodities annually thrown into the 
great circle of European commerce, and by its various revolutions 
annually distributed among all the different nations comprehended 
within it, must have been augmented by the whole surplus produce 
of America. A greater share of this greater mass, therefore, is likely 
to have fallen to each of those nations, to have increased their en- 
joyments, and augmented their industry. 

The exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to diminish, 
or, at least, to keep down below what they would otherwise rise to, 
both the enjoymei^ts and industry of all those nations in general, 
and of the American colonies in particular. It is a dead weight up- 
on the action of one of the great springs which puts into motion a 
great part of the business of mankind. By rendering the colony 
produce dearer in all other countries, it lessens its consumption, 
and thereby cramps the industry of the colonies, and both the en- 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 559 

jo3nnents and the industry of all other countries, which both enjoy 
less when they pay more for what they enjoy, and produce less 
when they get less for what they produce. By rendering the prod- 
uce of all other countries dearer in the colonies, it cramps, in the 
same manner, the industry of all other countries, and both the en- 
joyments and the industry of the colonies. It is a clog which, for 
the supposed benefit of some particular countries, embarrasses the 
pleasures, and encumbers the industry of all other countries; but 
of the colonies more than of any other. It not only excludes, as 
much as possible, all other countries from one particular market; 
but it confines, as much as possible, the colonies to one particular 
market: and the difference is very great between being excluded 
from one particular market, when all others are open, and being 
confined to one particular market, when all others are shut up. 
The surplus produce of the colonies, however, is the original source 
of all that increase of enjoyments and industry which Europe de- 
rives from the discovery and colonization of America; and the ex- 
clusive trade of the mother countries tends to render this source 
much less abundant than it otherwise would be. 

The particular advantages which each colonizing country de- 
rives from the colonies which particularly belong to it, are of two 
different kinds; first, those common advantages which every em- 
pire derives from the provinces subject to its dominion; and, sec- 
ondly, those peculiar advantages which are supposed to result from 
provinces of so very peculiar a nature as the European colonies of 
America. 

The common advantages which every empire derives from the 
provinces subject to its dominion, consist, first, in the military 
force which they furnish for its defence; and, secondly, in the rev- 
enue which they furnish for the support of its civil government. 
The Roman colonies furnished occasionally both the one and the 
other. The Greek colonies, sometimes, furnished a military force; 
but seldom any revenue.®'^ They seldom acknowledged themselves 
subject to the dominion of the mother city. They were generally 
her allies in war, but very seldom her subjects in peace. 

The European colonies of America have never yet furnished any 
military force for the defence of the mother country. Their military 
force has never yet been sufficient for their own defence; and in the 
different wars in which the mother countries have been engaged, 

“Not” appeals first in ed. 3 and seems to have been inserted in error The 
other countries are only excluded from a particular market, but the colonies 
are confined to one 

There is an example of revenue being furnished in Xenophon, Anahit V., 
V., 7, 10. 


dustry of 
aU 

Europe 

and 

America, 
especially 
the latter. 


(3) The 
particular 
advan- 
tages of 
the colo- 
nising 
countries 
are (a) 
the com- 
mon ad- 
vantages 
derived 
from 

provinces, 
(h) the 
peculiar 
advan- 
tages 
derived 
from 
provinces 
in 

America: 

(a) the 

common 

advan- 



tagesare 
contribu- 
tions of 
military 
forces and 
revenue, 

but none 

of the 

colonies 

have ever 

furnished 

military 

force, 

and the 
colonies 
of Spain 
and Por- 
tugal 
alone 
have con- 
tributed 
revenue. 

(6) the 
exclusive 
trade is 
the sole 
peculiar 
advan- 
tage. 

The ex- 
clusive 
trade of 
each 

country is 
a disad- 
vantage 
to the 
other 
countries, 


560 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the defence of their colonies has generally occasioned a very con- 
siderable distraction of the military force of those countries. In 
this respect, therefore, all the European colonies have, without ex- 
ception, been a cause rather of weakness than of strength to their 
respective mother countries. 

The colonies of Spain and Portugal only have contributed any 
revenue towards the defence of the mother country, or the support 
of her civil government.®® The taxes which have been levied upon 
those of other European nations, upon those of England in par- 
ticular, have seldom been equal to the expence laid out upon them 
in time of peace, and never sufficient to defray that which they oc- 
casioned in time of war. Such colonies, therefore, have been a 
source of expence and not of revenue to their respective mother 
countries. 

The advantages of such colonies to their respective mother coun- 
tries, consist altogether in those peculiar advantages which are sup- 
posed to result from provinces of so very peculiar a nature as the 
European colonies of America; and the exclusive trade, it is ac- 
knowledged, is the sole source of all those peculiar advantages. 

In consequence of this exclusive trade, all that part of the surplus 
produce of the English colonies, for example, which consists in what 
are called enumerated commodities,®® can be sent to no other coun- 
try but England, Other countries must afterwards buy it of her. It 
must be cheaper therefore in England than it can be in any other 
country, and must contribute more to increase the enjoyments of 
England than those of any other country. It must likewise con- 
tribute more to encourage her industry. For all those parts of her 
own surplus produce which England exchanges for those enumer- 
ated commodities, she must get a better price than any other coun- 
tries can get for the like parts of theirs, when they exchange them 
for the same commodities. The manufactures of England, for ex- 
ample, will purchase a greater quantity of the sugar and tobacco of 
her own colonies, than the like manufactures of other countries can 
purchase of that sugar and tobacco. So far, therefore, as the manu- 
factures of England and those of other countries are both to be ex- 
changed for the sugar and tobacco of the English colonies, this su- 
periority of price gives an encouragement to the former, beyond 
what the latter can in these circumstances enjoy. The exclusive 
trade of the colonies, therefore, as it diminishes, or, at least, keeps 
down below what they would otherwise rise to, both the enjoyments 
and the industry of the countries which do not possess it; so it gives 


Above, p. 541. 


Above, p. 544. 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 56 i 

an evident advantage to the countries which do possess it over those 
other countries. 

This advantage, however, will, perhaps, be found to be rather rather 
what may be called a relative than an absolute advantage; and to advantage 
give a superiority to the country which enjoys it, rather by depress- to that 
ing the industry and produce of other countries, than by raising country, 
those of that particular country above what they would naturally 
rise to in the case of a free trade. 

The tobacco of Maryland and Virginia, for example, by means of e,i,, Eng- 
the monopoly which England enjoys of it, certainly comes cheaper 
to England than it can do to France, to whom England commonly cheaper 
sells a considerable part of it. But had France, and all other Euro- than 
pean countries been, at all times, allowed a free trade to Maryland but n^t 
and Virginia, the tobacco of those colonies might, by this time, have cheaper 
come cheaper than it actually does, not only to all those other coun- 
tries, but likewise to England. The produce of tobacco, in conse- ^ 
quence of a market so much more Extensive than any which it has were no 
hitherto enjoyed, might, and probably would, by this time, have 
been so much increased as to reduce the profits of a tobacco planta- 
tion to their natural level with those of a corn plantation, which, it 
is supposed, they are still somewhat ahoveP The price of tobacco 
might, and probably would, by this time, have fallen somewhat 
lower than it is at present. An equal quantity of the commodities 
either of England, or of those other countries, might have pur- 
chased in Maryland and Virginia a greater quantity of tobacco than 
it can do at present, and, consequently, have been sold there for so 
much a better price. So far as that weed, therefore, can, by its 
cheapness and abundance, increase the enjoyments or augment the 
industry either of England or of any other country, it would, prob- 
ably, in the case of a free trade, have produced both these effects in 
somewhat a greater degree than it can do at present. England, in- 
deed, would not in this case have had any advantage over other 
countries. She might have bought the tobacco of her colonies some- 
what cheaper, and, consequently, have sold some of her own com- 
modities somewhat dearer than she actually does. But she could 
neither have bought the one cheaper nor sold the other dearer than 
any other country might have done. She might, perhaps, have 
gained an absolute, but she would certainly have lost a relative ad- 
vantage. 

In order, however, to obtain this relative advantage in the colony To sub- 
trade, in order to execute the invidious and malignant project of ex- 
eluding as much as possible other nations from any share in it, Eng- to this 
Above, p. 157. 



disad- 
vantage 
England 
has made 
two sac- 
rifices. 

The with- 
drawal of 
foreign 
capital 
from the 
colony 
trade 
raised 
profits in 
it and 
drew 
capital 
fiom , 
other 
British 
trades 
and 

thereby 
raised 
profits in 
them, 


and con- 
tinues to 
do so 


The col- 
ony trade 
has in- 
creased 
faster 
than the 
whole 
British 
capital, 


562 the wealth of nations 

land, there are very probable reasons for believing, has not only sac- 
rificed a part of the absolute advantage which she, as well as every 
other nation, might have derived from that trade, but has subjected 
herself both to an absolute and to a relative disadvantage in almost 
every other branch of trade. 

When, by the act of navigation,^^ England assumed to herself the 
monopoly of the colony trade, the foreign capitals which had before 
been employed in it were necessarily withdrawn from it. The Eng- 
lish capital, which had before carried on but a part of it, was now to 
carry on the whole. The capital which had before supplied the col- 
onies with but a part of the goods which they wanted from Europe, 
was now all that was employed to supply them with the whole. But 
it could not supply them with the whole, and the goods with which 
it did supply them were necessarily sold very dear. The capital 
which had before bought but a part of the surplus produce of the 
colonies, was now all that was employed to buy the whole. But it 
could not buy the whole at any thing near the old price, and, there- 
fore, whatever it did buy it necessarily bought very cheap. But in 
an employment of capital in which the merchant sold very dear and 
bought very cheap, the profit must have been very great, and much 
above the ordinary level of profit in other branches of trade. This 
superiority of profit in the colony trade could not fail to draw from 
other branches of trade a part of the capital which had before been 
employed in them. But this revulsion of capital, as it must have 
gradually increased the competition of capitals in the colony trade, 
so it must have gradually diminished that competition in all those 
other branches of trade ; as it must have gradually lowered the prof- 
its of the one, so it must have gradually raised those of the other, 
till the profits of all came to a new level, different from and some- 
what higher than that at which they had been before. 

This double effect, of drawing capital from all other trades, and 
of raising the rate of profit somewhat higher than it otherwise would 
have been in all trades, was not only produced by this monopoly 
upon its first establishment, but has continued to be produced by it 
ever since. 

First, this monopoly has been continually drawing capital from 
all other trades to be employed in that of the colonies. 

Though the wealth of Great Britain has increased very much 
since the establishment of the act of navigation, it certainly has not 
increased in the same proportion as that of the colonies. But the for- 
eign trade of every country naturally increases in proportion to its 
wealth, its surplus produce in proportion to its whole produce; and 
Above, pp. 429-431 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 563 

Great Britain having engrossed to herself almost the whole of what 
may be called the foreign trade of the colonies, and her capital not 
having increased in the same proportion as the extent of that trade, 
she could not carry it on without continually withdrawing from 
other branches of trade some part of the capital which had before 
been employed in them, as well as withholding from them a great 
deal more which would otherwise have gone to them. Since the es- 
tablishment of the act of navigation, accordingly, the colony trade 
has been continually increasing, while many other branches of for- 
eign trade, particularly of that to other parts of Europe, have been 
continually decaying. Our manufactures for foreign sale, instead of 
being suited, as before the act of navigation, to the neighbouring 
market of Europe, or to the more distant one of the countries which 
lie round the Mediterranean sea, have, the greater part of them, 
been accommodated to the still more distant one of the colonies, to 
the market in which they have the monopoly, rather than to that in 
which they have many competitors. The causes of decay in other 
branches of foreign trade, which, by Sir Matthew Decker, and 
other writers, have been sought for in the excess and improper mode 
of taxation, in the high price of labour, in the increase of luxury, 
&c. may all be found in the over-growth of the colony trade. The 
mercantile capital of Great Britain, though very great, yet not be- 
ing infinite; and though greatly increased since the act of naviga- 
tion, yet not being increased in the same proportion as the colony 
trade, that trade could not possibly be carried on without withdraw- 
ing some part of that capital from other branches of trade, nor con- 
sequently without some decay of those other branches. 

England, it must be observed, was a great trading country, her 
mercantile capital was very great and likely to become still greater 
and greater every day, not only before the act of navigation had es- 
tablished the monopoly of the colony trade, but before that trade 
was very considerable. In the Dutch war, during the government 
of Cromwel, her navy was superior to that of Holland; and in that 
which broke out in the beginning of the reign of Charles IL it was 
at least equal, perhaps superior, to the united navies of France and 
Holland. Its superiority, perhaps, would scarce appear greater in 
the present times; at least if the Dutch navy was to bear the same 
proportion to the Dutch commerce now which it did then. But this 
great naval power could not, in either of those wars, be owing to the 
act of navigation. During the first of them the plan of that act had 

Essay on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, consequently of 
the Value of the Lands of Britain and on the means to restore both, 2nd ed,, 
1750, pp. 28-36, et passim. 


and the 
colonial 
monopoly 
has 

merely 
changed 
the direc- 
tion of 
British 
trade. 



The mo- 
nopoly 
has kept 
the rate 
of profit 
in British 
trade 
higher 
than it 
naturally 
would 
have 
been, 


564 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

been but just formed; and though before the breaking out of the 
second it had been fully enacted by legal authority; yet no part of 
it could have had time to produce any considerable effect, and least 
of all that part which established the exclusive trade to the colonies. 
Both the colonies and their trade were inconsiderable then in com- 
parison of what they are now. The island of Jamaica was an un- 
wholesome desert, little inhabited, and less cultivated. New York 
and New Jersey were in the possession of the Dutch: the half of St. 
Christopher’s in that of the French. The island of Antigua, the two 
Carolinas, Pensylvania, Georgia, and Nova Scotia, were not plant- 
ed. Virginia, Maryland, and New England were planted; and 
though they were very thriving colonies, yet there was not, perhaps, 
at that time, either in Europe or America, a single person who fore- 
saw or even suspected the rapid progress which they have since made 
in wealth, population and improvement. The island of Barbadoes, 
in short, was the only British colony of any consequence of which 
the condition at that time bore any resemblance to what it is at pres- 
ent. The trade of the colonies, of which England, even for some lime 
after the act of navigation, enjoyed but a part (for the act of navi- 
gation was not very strictly executed till several years after it was 
enacted), could not at that time be the cause of the great trade of 
England, nor of the great naval power which was supported by that 
trade. The trade which at that time supported that great naval pow- 
er was the trade of Europe, and of the countries which lie round the 
Mediterranean sea. But the share which Great Britain at present 
enjoys of that trade could not support any such great naval power. 
Had the growing trade of the colonies been left free to all nations, 
whatever share of it might have fallen to Great Britain, and a very 
considerable share would probably have fallen to her, must have 
been all an addition to this great trade of which she was before in 
possession. In consequence of the monopoly, the increase of the col- 
ony trade has not so much occasioned an addition to the trade which 
Great Britain had before, as a total change in its direction. 

Secondly, this monopoly has necessarily contributed to keep up 
the rate of profit in all the different branches of British trade higher 
than it naturally would have been, had all nations been allowed a 
free trade to the* British colonies. 

The monopoly of the colony trade, as it necessarily drew towards 
that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than 
what would have gone to it of its own accord ; so by the expulsion of 
all foreign capitals it necessarily reduced the whole quantity of 
capital employed in that trade below what it naturally would have 
been in the case of a free trade. But, by lessening the competition of 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES S^S 

capitals in that branch of trade, it necessarily raised the rate of 
profit in that branch. By lessening too the competition of British 
capitals in all other branches of trade, it necessarily raised the rate 
of British profit in all those other branches. Whatever may have 
been, at any particular period, since the establishment of the act of 
navigation, the state or extent of the mercantile capital of Great 
Britain, the monopoly of the colony trade must, during the contin- 
uance of that state, have raised the ordinary rate of British profit 
higher than it otherwise would have been both in that and in all the 
other branches of British trade. If, since the establishment of the 
act of navigation, the ordinary rate of British profit has fallen con- 
siderably, as it certainly has, it must have fallen still lower, had not 
the monopoly established by that act contributed to keep it up. 

But whatever raises in any country the ordinary rate of profit 
higher than it otherwise would be, necessarily subjects that country 
both to an absolute and to a relative disadvantage in every branch 
of trade of which she has not the monopoly. 

It subjects her to an absolute disadvantage: because in such 
branches of trade her merchants cannot get this greater profit, with- 
out selling dearer than they otherwise would do both the goods of 
foreign countries which they import into their own, and the goods 
of their own country which they export to foreign countries. Their 
own country must both buy dearer and sell dearer; must both buy 
less and sell less; must both enjoy less and produce less, than she 
otherwise would do. 

It subjects her to a relative disadvantage; because in such 
branches of trade it sets other countries which are not subject to the 
same absolute disadvantage, either more above her or less below her 
than they otherwise would he. It enables them both to enjoy more 
and to produce more in proportion to what she enjoys and produces. 
It renders their superiority greater or their inferiority less than it 
otherwise would be. By raising the price of her produce above what 
it otherwise would be, it enables the merchants of other countries to 
undersell her in foreign markets, and thereby to justle her out of al- 
most all those branches of trade, of which she has not the monopoly. 

Our merchants frequently complain of the high wages of British 
labour as the cause of their manufactures being undersold in foreign 
markets; but they are silent about the high profits of stock. They 
complain of the extravagant gain of other people; but they say 
nothing of their own. The high profits of British stock, however, 
may contribute towards raising the price of British manufactures in 


and this 
puts the 
country 
at a dis- 
advantage 
in the 
trades of 
which she 
has no 
monop- 
oly, 

making 
her buy 
less and 
sell less, 

and en- 
abling 
other 
countries 
to under- 
sell her in 
foreign 
markets. 


High pro- 
fits raise 
the price 
of manu- 
factures 
more than 
high 
wages. 


^®Ed. I reads “rate of the profit.’ 



So British 

capital 

has been 

taken 

from 

European 

and 

Mediter- 

ranean 

trade, 

partly 
attracted 
by high 
profit in 
the 

colony 

trade, 

partly 
driven 
out by 
foreign 
compe- 
tition. 

Whfie 
raising 
British 
profit, the 
monopoly 
has low- 
ered 
foreign 
profits. 

The 
colony 
trade is 
supposed 
to be 
more ad- 
vanta- 
geous 
than 
others, 

but trade 
with a 
neigh- 
bouring 


S66 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

many cases as much, and in some perhaps more, than the high 
wages of British labour.'^^ 

It is in this manner that the capital of Great Britain, one may 
justly say, has partly been drawn and partly been driven from the 
greater part of the different branches of trade of which she has not 
the monopoly; from the trade of Europe in particular, and from 
that of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea. 

It has partly been drawn from those branches of trade; by the at- 
traction of superior profit in the colony trade in consequence of the 
continual increase of that trade, and of the continual insufficiency 
of the capital which had carried it on one year to carry it on the 
next. 

It has partly been driven from them; by the advantage which the 
high rate of profit, established in Great Britain, gives to other coun- 
tries, in all the different branches of trade of which Great Britain 
has not the monopoly. 

As the monopoly of the colony trade has drawn from those other 
branches a part of the British capital which would otherwise have 
been employed in them, so it has forced into them many foreign 
capitals which would never have gone to them, had they not been 
expelled from the colony trade. In those other branches of trade it 
has diminished the competition of British capitals, and thereby 
raised the rate of British profit higher than it otherwise would have 
been. On the contrary, it has increased the competition of foreign 
capitals, and thereby sunk the rate of foreign profit lower than it 
otherwise would have been. Both in the one way and in the other it 
must evidently have subjected Great Britain to a relative disadvan- 
tage in all those other branches of trade. 

The colony trade, however, it may perhaps be said, is more ad- 
vantageous to Great Britain than any other; and the monopoly, by 
forcing into that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great 
Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has turned that 
capital into an employment more advantageous to the country than 
any other which it could have found. 

The most advantageous emplo3nnent of any capital to the coun- 
try to which it belongs, is that which maintains there the greatest 
quantity of productive labour, and increases the most the annual 
produce of the land and labour of that country. But the quantity of 
productive labour which any capital employed in the foreign trade 
of consumption can maintain, is exactly in proportion, it has been 

^*This passage is much the same as that which appears above, p. 98; but 
this is the original, as the other was not in ed. i. 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 5^7 

shewn in the second book,'^® to the frequency of its returns. A capi- 
tal of a thousand pounds, for example, employed in a foreign trade 
of consumption, of which the returns are made regularly once in the 
year, can keep in constant employment, in the country to which it 
belongs, a quantity of productive labour equal to what a thousand 
pounds can maintain there for a year. If the returns are made twice 
or thrice in the year, it can keep in constant employment a quantity 
of productive labour equal to what two or three thousand pounds 
can maintain there for a year. A foreign trade of consumption car- 
ried on with a neighbouring,*^® is, upon this account, in general, more 
advantageous than one carried on with a distant country; and for 
the same reason a direct foreign trade of consumption, as it has like- 
wise been shewn in the second book,^*^ is in general more advan- 
tageous than a round-about one. 

But the monopoly of the colony trade, so far as it has operated 
upon the employment of the capital of Great Britain, has in all 
cases forced some part of it from a foreign trade of consumption 
carried on with a neighbouring,^® to one carried on with a more dis- 
tant country, and in many cases from a direct foreign trade of con- 
sumption to a round-about one. 

First, the monopoly of the colony trade has in all cases forced 
some part of the capital of Great Britain from a foreign trade of 
consumption carried on with a neighbouring, to one carried on with 
a more distant country. 

It has, in all cases, forced some part of that capital from the trade 
with Europe, and with the countries which lie round the Mediter- 
ranean sea, to that with the more distant regions of America and 
the West Indies, from which the returns are necessarily less fre- 
quent, not only on account of the greater distance, but on account 
of the peculiar circumstances of those countries. New colonies, it 
has already been observed, are always understocked. Their capital 
is always much less than what they could employ with great profit 
and advantage in the improvement and cultivation of their land. 
They have a constant demand, therefore, for more capital than they 
have of their own; and, in order to supply the deficiency of their 
own, they endeavour to borrow as much as they can of the mother 
country, to whom they are, therefore, always in debt. The most 
common way in which the colonists contract this debt, is not by 
borrowing upon bond of the rich people of the mother country, 
though they sometimes do this too, but by running as much in ar- 
rear to their correspondents, who supply them with goods from Eur- 

™ Above, vol. i,, p. 349. ” Ed. i reads “with a neighbouring country.” 

Above, vol i., p. 350. ™ Ed. i reads “with a neighbouring country.” 


country is 
more ad- 
vanta- 
geous 
than with 
a distant 
one, and 
a direct 
trade is 
more ad- 
vanta- 
geous 
than a 
round- 
about, 


while the 
monopo- 
ly has 
forced 
capital 
into (i) a 
distant 
and (2) a 
round- 
about 
trade. 


(i) The 
trade 
with 
America 
and the 
West 
Indiesis 
distant 
and the 
returns 
peculiarly 
infre- 
quent. 



(2) It is 
also large*- 
lya 
round- 
about 
trade. 


568 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ope, as those correspondents will allow them. Their annual returns 
frequently do not amount to more than a third, and sometimes not 
to so great a proportion of what they owe. The whole capital, there- 
fore, which their correspondents advance to them is seldom re- 
turned to Britain in less than three, and sometimes not in less than 
four or five years. But a British capital of a thousand pounds, for 
example, which is returned to Great Britain only once in five years, 
can keep in constant employment only one-fifth part of the British 
industry which it could maintain if the whole was returned once in 
the year; and, instead of the quantity of industry which a thousand 
pounds could maintain for a year, can keep in constant employ- 
ment the quantity only which two hundred pounds can maintain 
for a year. The planter, no doubt, by the high price which he pays 
for the goods from Europe, by the interest upon the bills which he 
grants at distant dates, and by the commission upon the renewal of 
those which he grants at near dates, makes up, and probably more 
than makes up, all the loss which his correspondent can sustain by 
this delay. But, though he may make up the loss of his correspon- 
dent, he cannot make up that of Great Britain. In a trade of which 
the returns are very distant, the profit of the merchant may be as 
great or greater than in one in which they are very frequent and 
near; but the advantage of the country in which he resides, the 
quantity of productive labour constantly maintained there, the an- 
nual produce of the land and labour must always be much less. That 
the returns of the trade to America, and still more those of that to 
the West Indies, are, in general, not only more distant, but more 
irregular, and more uncertain too, than those of the trade to any 
part of Europe, or even of the countries which lie round the Medi- 
terranean sea, will readily be allowed, I imagine, by every body who 
has any experience of those different branches of trade. 

Secondly, the monopoly of the colony trade has, in many cases, 
forced some part of the capital of Great Britain from a direct for-^ 
eign trade of consumption, into a round-about one. 

Among the enumerated commodities which can be sent to no 
other market but Great Britain, there are several of which the quan- 
tity exceeds very much the consumption of Great Britain, and of 
which a part, therefore, must be exported to other countries. But 
this cannot be done without forcing some part of the capital of 
Great Britain into a round-about foreign trade of consumption. 
Maryland and Virginia, for example, send annually to Great Britain 
upwards of ninety-six thousand hogsheads of tobacco, and the con- 
sumption of Great Britain is said not to exceed fourteen thou- 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 5^9 

JandJ^ Upwards of eighty-two thousand hogsheads, therefore, must 
oe exported to other countries, to France, to Holland, and to the 
countries which lie round the Baltic and Mediterranean seas. But, 
that part of the capital of Great Britain which brings those eighty- 
two thousand hogsheads to Great Britain, which re-exports them 
from thence to those other countries, and which brings back from 
those other countries to Great Britain either goods or money in re- 
turn, is employed in a round-about foreign trade of consumption; 
and is necessarily forced into this employment in order to dispose of 
this great surplus. If we would compute in how many years the 
whole of this capital is likely to come back to Great Britain, we 
must add to the distance of the American returns that of the returns 
from those other countries. If, in the direct foreign trade of con- 
sumption which we carry on with America, the whole capital em- 
ployed frequently does not come back in less than three or four 
years; the whole capital employed in this round-about one is not 
likely to come back in less than four or five. If the one can keep in 
constant employment but a third or a fourth part of the domestic 
industry which could be maintained by a capital returned once in 
the year, the other can keep in constant employment but a fourth or 
a fifth part of that industry. At some of the outports a credit is com- 
monly given to those foreign correspondents to whom they export 
their tobacco. At the port of London, indeed, it is commonly sold 
for ready money. The rule is, Weigh and fay. At the port of Lon- 
don, therefore, the final returns of the whole round-about trade are 
more distant than the returns from America by the time only which 
the goods may lie unsold in the warehouse; where, however, they 
may sometimes lie long enough.®^ But, had not the colonies been 
confined to the market of Great Britain for the sale of their tobacco, 
very little more of it would probably have come to us than what was 
necessary for the home consumption. The goods which Great Brit- 
ain purchases at present for her own consumption with the great 
surplus of tobacco which she exports to other countries, she would, 
in this case, probably have purchased with the immediate produce 
of her own industry, or with some part of her own manufactures. 
That produce, those manufactures, instead of being almost entirely 
suited to one great market, as at present, would probably have been 
fitted to a great number of smaller markets. Instead of one great 
round-about foreign trade of consumption. Great Britain would 

These figures are given above, pp. 353, 467. 

These four sentences beginning with “At some of the outports” are not in 
ed. I. 



570 


The mo- 
nopoly 
has also 
forced 
part of 
the capi- 
tal of 
Great 
Britain 
into a 
carrying 
trade, 


and 

makes her 
whole in- 
dustry 
and com- 
merce 
less secure 
owing to 
its being 
driven 
into one 
channel 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

probably have carried on a great number of small direct foreign 
trades of the same kind. On account of the frequency of the returns,, 
a part, and probably but a small part; perhaps not above a third or 
a fourth, of the capital which at present carries on this great round- 
about trade, might have been sufficient to carry on all those small 
direct ones, might have kept in constant employment an equal 
quantity of British industry, and have equally supported the an- 
nual produce of the land and labour of Great Britain. All the pur- 
poses of this trade being, in this manner, answered by a much 
smaller capital, there would have been a large spare capital to ap- 
ply to other purposes; to improve the lands, to increase the manu- 
factures, and to extend the commerce of Great Britain; to come 
into competition at least with the other British capitals employed in 
all those different ways, to reduce the rate of profit in them all, and 
thereby to give to Great Britain, in all of them, a superiority over 
other countries still greater than what she at present enjoys.^^ 

The monopoly of the colony trade too has forced some part of 
the capital of Great Britain from all foreign trade of consumption 
to a carrying trade; and, consequently, from supporting more or 
less the industry of Great Britain, to be employed altogether in 
supporting partly that of the colonies, and partly that of some 
other countries. 

The goods, for example, which are annually purchased with the 
great surplus of eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco annual- 
ly re-exported from Great Britain, are not all consumed in Great 
Britain. Part of them, linen from Germany and Holland, for ex- 
ample, is returned to &e colonies for their particular consumption. 
But, that part of the capital of Great Britain which buys the to- 
bacco with which this linen is afterwards bought, is necessarily 
withdrawn from supporting the industry of Great Britain, to be 
employed altogether in supporting, partly that of the colonies, 
and partly that of the particular countries who pay for this tobac- 
co with the produce of their own industry. 

The monopoly of the colony trade besides, by forcing towards it 
a much greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than 
what would naturally have gone to it, seems to have broken alto- 
gether that natural balance which would otherwise have taken 
place among all the different branches of British industry. The in- 
dustry of Great Britain, instead of being accommodated to a great 
number of small markets, has been principally suited to one great 
market. Her commerce, instead of running in a great number of 
small channels, has been taught to run principally in one great 

^ Ed. I reads “possesses.” 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 57i 

channel. But the whole system of her industry and commerce has 
thereby been rendered less secure; the whole state of her body pol- 
itic less healthful, than it otherwise would have been. In her present 
condition, Great Britain resembles one of those unwholesome 
bodies in which some of the vital parts are overgrown, and which, 
upon that account, are liable to many dangerous disorders scarce 
incident to those in which all the parts are more properly propor- 
tioned. A small stop in that great blood-vessel, which has been arti- 
ficially swelled beyond its natural dimensions, and through which 
an unnatural proportion of the industry and commerce of the coun- 
try has been forced to circulate, is very likely to bring on the most 
dangerous disorders upon the whole body politic. The expectation 
of a rupture with the colonies, accordingly, has struck the people of 
Great Britain with more terror than they ever felt for a Spanish 
armada, or a French invasion. It was this terror, whether well or ill 
grounded, which rendered the repeal of the stamp act,®^ among the 
merchants at least, a popular measure. In the total exclusion from 
the colony market, was it to last only for a few years, the greater 
part of our merchants used to fancy that they foresaw an entire 
stop to their trade; the greater part of our master manufacturers, 
the entire ruin of their business; and the greater part of our work- 
men, an end of their employment. A rupture with any of our neigh- 
bours upon the continent, though likely too to occasion some stop 
or interruption in the employments of some of all these different 
orders of people, is foreseen, however, without any such general 
emotion. The blood, of which the circulation is stopt in some of the 
smaller vessels, easily disgorges itself into the greater, without oc- 
casioning any dangerous disorder; but, when it is stopt in any of 
the greater vessels, convulsions, apoplexy, or death, are the im- 
mediate and unavoidable consequences. If but one of those over- 
grown manufactures, which by means either of bounties or of the 
monopoly of the home and colony markets, have been artificially 
raised up to an unnatural height, finds some small stop or interrup- 
tion in its employment, it frequently occasions a mutiny and dis- 
order alarming to government, and embarrassing even to the de- 
liberations of the legislature. How great, therefore, would be the 
disorder and confusion, it was thought, which must necessarily be 
occasioned by a sudden and entire stop in the employment of so 
great a proportion of our principal manufacturers? 

Some moderate and gradual relaxation of the laws which give to The 
Great Britain the exclusive trade to the colonies, till it is rendered 
in a great measure free, seems to be the only expedient which can, in 

Ed. I places “a popular measure” here 



monopoly 
is desir- 
able. 


The pres- 
ent ex- 
clusion 
from the 
trade 
with the 
twelve 
provinces 
would 
have been 
more se- 
verely felt 
but for 
five tran- 
sitory 


572 the wealth oe nations 

all future times, deliver her from this danger, which can enable 
her or even force her to withdraw some part of her capital from this 
overgrown employment, and to turn it, though with less profit, to- 
wards other employments; and which, by gradually diminishing 
one branch of her industry and gradually increasing all the rest, 
can by degrees restore all the different branches of it to that natu- 
ral, healthful, and proper proportion which perfect liberty neces- 
sarily establishes, and which perfect liberty can alone preserve. To 
open the colony trade all at once to all nations, might not only oc- 
casion some transitory inconveniency, but a great permanent loss 
to the greater part of those whose industry or capital is at present 
engaged in it. The sudden loss of the employment even of the ships 
which import the eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco, which 
are over and above the consumption of Great Britain, might alone 
be felt very sensibly. Such are the unfortunate effects of all the reg- 
ulations of the mercantile system! They not only introduce very 
dangerous disorders into the state of the body politic, but disorders 
which it is often difficult to remedy, without occasioning, for a time 
at least, still greater disorders. In what manner, therefore, the col- 
ony trade ought gradually to be opened; what are the restraints 
which ought first, and what are those which ought last to be taken 
away; or in what manner the natural system of perfect liberty and 
justice ought gradually to be restored, we must leave to the wisdom 
of future statesmen and legislators to determine. 

Five different events, unforeseen and unthought of, have very 
fortunately concurred to hinder Great Britain from feeling, so sen- 
sibly as it was generally expected she would, the total exclusion 
which has now taken place for more than a year (from the first of 
December, 1774) from a very important branch of the colon} 
trade, that of the twelve associated provinces of North America 
First, those colonies, in preparing themselves for their non-impor 
tation agreement, drained Great Britain completely of all the com 
modities which were fit for their market: secondly, the extraor 
dinary demand of the Spanish Flota has, this year, drained Ger- 
many and the North of many commodities, linen in particular 

Ed. I does not contain “in all future limes.” 

The date at which the non-importation agreement began to operate. 

^ “For the greater security of the valuable cargoes sent to America, as weL 
as for the more easy prevention of fraud, the commerce of Spain with its 
colonies is carried on by fleets which sail under strong convoys. These fleets, 
consisting of two squadrons, one distinguished by the name of the ‘Galeons,’ 
the other by that of the ‘Flota, ^ are equipped annually. Formerly they took 
their departure from Seville; but as the port of Cadiz has been found more 
commodious, they have sailed from it since the year i72o.”~-W. Robertson, 
History of America, bk. viii.; in Works, 1825, vol. vii., p. 372. 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 573 

which used to come into competition, even in the Dritish market, 
with the manufactures of Great Britain: thirdly, the peace between 
Russia and Turkey,^® has occasioned an extraordinary demand 
from the Turkey market, which, during the distress of the country, 
and while a Russian fleet was cruizing in the Archipelago, had been 
very poorly supplied: fourthly, the demand of the North of Europe 
for the manufactures of Great Britain, has been increasing from 
year to year for some time past: and, fifthly, the late partition 
and consequential pacification of Poland, by opening the market of 
that great country, have this year added an extraordinary demand 
from thence to the increasing demand of the North. These events 
are all, except the fourth, in their nature transitory and accidental, 
and the exclusion from so important a branch of the colony trade, if 
unfortunately it should continue much longer, may still occasion 
some degree of distress. This distress, however, as it will come on 
gradually, will be felt much less severely than if it had come on all 
at once; and, in the mean time, the industry and capital of the 
country may find a new employment and direction, so as to prevent 
this distress from ever rising to any considerable height. 

The monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, so far as it has 
turned towards that trade a greater proportion of the capital of 
Great Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has in all 
cases turned it, from a foreign trade of consumption with a neigh- 
bouring, into one with a more distant country; in many cases, from 
a direct foreign trade of consumption, into a round-about one; and 
in some cases, from all foreign trade of consumption, into a carrying 
trade. It has in all cases, therefore, turned it, from a direction in 
which it would have maintained a greater quantity of productive 
labour, into one, in which it can maintain a much smaller quantity. 
By suiting, besides, to one particular market only, so great a part of 
the industry and commerce of Great Britain, it has rendered the 
whole state of that industry and commerce more precarious and less 
secure, than if their produce had been accommodated to a greater 
variety of markets. 

We must carefully distinguish between the effects of the colony 
trade and those of the monopoly of that trade. The former are al- 
ways and necessarily beneficial; the latter always and necessarily 
hurtful. But the former are so beneficial, that the colony trade, 
though subject to a monopoly, and notwithstanding the hurtful ef- 
fects of that monopoly, is still upon the whole beneficial, and greatly 
beneficial; though a good deal less so than it otherwise would be. 

'’“By the treaty of Kainardji, 1774. In 1773. 

Ed. I reads “prevent it.*’ 


circun.- 

stances. 


The mo- 
nopoly is 
bad, 


but the 
trade it^ 
self is 
good. 



The trade 
In its 
natural 
state in- 
creases 
the pro- 
ductive 
labour of 
Great 
Britain. 


The mo- 
nopoly 
dimin- 
ishes it. 


The nat- 
ural good 


574 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

The effect of the colony trade in its natural and free state, is to 
open a great, though distant market for such parts of the produce of 
British industry as may exceed the demand of the markets nearer 
home, of those of Europe, and of the countries which lie round the 
Mediterranean sea. In its natural and free state, the colony trade, 
without drawing from those markets any part of the produce which 
had ever been sent to them, encourages Great Britain to increase the 
surplus continually, by continually presenting new equivalents to 
be exchanged for it. In its natural and free state, the colony trade 
tends to increase the quantity of productive labour in Great Brit- 
ain, but without altering in any respect the direction of that which 
had been employed there before. In the natural and free state of the 
colony trade, the competition of all other nations would hinder the 
rate of profit from rising above the common level either in the new 
market, or in the new employment. The new market, without draw- 
ing any thing from the old one, would create, if one may say so, a 
new produce for its own supply; and that new produce would con- 
stitute a new capital for carrying on the new employment, which in 
the same manner would draw nothing from the old one. 

The monopoly of the colony trade, on the contrary, by excluding 
the competition of other nations, and thereby raising the rate of 
profit both in the new market and in the new employment, draws 
produce from the old market and capital from the old employment. 
To augment our share of the colony trade beyond what it otherwise 
would be, is the avowed purpose of the monopoly. If our share of 
that trade were to be no greater with, than it would have been with- 
out the monopoly, there could have been no reason for establish- 
ing the monopoly. But whatever forces into a branch of trade of 
which the returns are slower and more distant than 'those of the 
greater part of other trades, a greater proportion of the capital of 
any country, than what of its own accord would go to that branch, 
necessarily renders the whole quantity of productive labour an- 
nually maintained there, the whole annual produce of the land and 
labour of that country, less than they otherwise would be. It keeps 
down the revenue of the inhabitants of that country, below what it 
would naturally rise to, and thereby diminishes their power of ac- 
cumulation. It not only hinders, at all times, their capital from 
maintaining so great a quantity of productive labour as it would 
otherwise maintain, but it hinders it from increasing so fast as it 
would otherwise increase, and consequently from maintaining a still 
greater quantity of productive labour. 

The natural good effects of the colony trade, however, more than 
counterbalance to Great Britain the bad effects of the monopoly, so 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 575 

that, monopoly and all together, that trade, even as it is carried on 
at present, is not only advantageous, but greatly advantageous. 
The new market and the new employment^® which are opened by 
the colony trade, are of much greater extent than that portion of the 
old market and of the old employment which is lost by the monop- 
oly. The new produce and the new capital which has been created, 
if one may say so, by the colony trade, maintain in Great Britain a 
greater quantity of productive labour, than what can have been 
thrown out of employment by the revulsion of capital from other 
trades of which the returns are more frequent. If the colony trade, 
however, even as it is carried on at present, is advantageous to 
Great Britain, it is not by means of the monopoly, but in spite of 
the monopoly. 

It is rather for the manufactured than for the rude produce of 
Europe, that the colony trade opens a new market. Agriculture is 
the proper business of all new colonies; a business which the cheap- 
ness of land renders more advantageous than any other. They 
abound, therefore, in the rude produce of land, and instead of im- 
porting it from other countries, they have generally a large surplus 
to export. In new colonies, agriculture either draws hands from all 
other employments, or keeps them from going to any other employ- 
ment. There are few hands to spare for the necessary, and none for 
the ornamental manufactures. The greater part of the manufactures 
of both kinds, they find it cheaper to purchase of other countries 
than to make for themselves. It is chiefly by encouraging the manu- 
factures of Europe, that the colony trade indirectly encourages its 
agriculture. The manufacturers of Europe, to whom that trade 
gives employment, constitute a new market for the produce of the 
land; and the most advantageous of all markets; the home market 
for the corn and cattle, for the bread and butcher’s-meat of Eur- 
ope; is thus greatly extended by means of the trade to America. 

But that the monopoly of the trade of populous and thriving col- 
onies is not alone sufficient to establish, or even to maintain manu- 
factures in any country, the examples of Spain and Portugal suf- 
ficiently demonstrate. Spain and Portugal were manufacturing 
countries before they had any considerable colonies. Since they had 
the richest and most fertile in the world, they have both ceased to 
be so. 

In Spain and Portugal, the bad effects of the monopoly, aggra- 
vated by other causes, have, perhaps, nearly overbalanced the 
natural good effects of the colony trade. These causes seem to be, 

Eds I and 2 read “and employment.” 

Ed I reads “have entirely conquered.” 


effects of 
the trade 
more than 
counter- 
balance 
the bad 
effects of 
the mo- 
nopoly. 


The colo- 
nies offer 
a market 
for the 
manufac^ 
tured 
rather 
than the 
rude pro- 
duce of 
Europe, 


but the 
monopoly 
has not 
main- 
tained 
the 

manufac- 
tures of 
Spain and 
Portugal, 

where the 
bad ef- 
fects of 



the mo- 
nopoly 
have 
nearly 
over- 
balanced 
the good 
effects of 
the trade. 


In Eng- 
land the 
good ef- 
fects of 
the trade 
have 
greatly 
counter- 
acted the 
bad ef- 
fects of 
the mo- 
nopoly. 


The trade 
has bene- 
fited Brit- 
ish 

manufac- 
tures in 
spite of 
the mo- 
nopoly, 
not in 
conse- 
quence of 
it. 


576 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Other monopolies of different kinds; the degradation of the value of 
gold and silver below what it is in most other countries; the exclu- 
sion from foreign markets by improper taxes upon exportation, and 
the narrowing of the home market, by still more improper taxes 
upon the transportation of goods from one part of the country to 
another; but above all, that irregular and partial administration of 
justice, which often protects the rich and powerful debtor from the 
pursuit of his injured creditor, and which makes the industrious 
part of the nation afraid to prepare goods for the consumption of 
those haughty and great men, to whom they dare not refuse to sell 
upon credit, and from whom they are altogether uncertain of re- 
payment. 

In England, on the contrary, the natural good effects of the col- 
ony trade, assisted by other causes, have in a great measure con- 
quered the bad effects of the monopoly. These causes seem to be, 
the general liberty of trade, which, notwithstanding some restraints, 
is at least equal, perhaps superior, to what it is in any other coun- 
try; the liberty of exporting, duty free, almost all sorts of goods 
which are the produce of domestic industry, to almost any foreign 
country; and what, perhaps, is of still greater importance, the un- 
bounded liberty of transporting them from any one part of our own 
country to any other, without being obliged to give any account to 
any public office, without being liable to question or examination of 
any kind; but above all, that equal and impartial administration of 
justice which renders the rights of the meanest British subject re- 
spectable to the greatest, and which, by securing to every man the 
fruits of his own industry, gives the greatest and most effectual en- 
couragement to every sort of industry. 

If the manufactures of Great Britain, however, have been ad- 
vanced, as they certainly have, by the colony trade, it has not been 
by means of the monopoly of that trade, but in spite of the monop- 
oly. The effect of the monopoly has been, not to augment the quan- 
tity, but to alter the quality and shape of a part of the manufactures 
of Great Britain, and to accommodate to a market, from which the 
returns are slow and distant, what would otherwise have been ac- 
commodated to one from which the returns are frequent and near. 
Its effect has consequently been to turn a part of the capital of 
Great Britain from an employment in which it would have main- 
tained a greater quantity of manufacturing industry, to one in 
which it maintains a much smaller, and thereby to diminish, in- 
stead of increasing, the whole quantity of manufacturing industry 
maintained in Great Britain. 

The monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, like all the other 



577 


AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 

mean and malignant expedients of the mercantile system, depresses 
the industry of all other countries, but chiefly that of the colonies, 
without in the least increasing, but on the contrary diminishing, 
that of the country in whose favour it is established. 

The monopoly hinders the capital of that country, whatever may 
at any particular time be the extent of that capital, from" maintain- 
ing so great a quantity of productive labour as it would otherwise 
maintain, and from affording so great a revenue to the industrious 
inhabitants as it would otherwise afford. But as capital can be in- 
creased only by savings from revenue, the monopoly, by hindering 
it from affording so great a revenue as it would otherwise afford, 
necessarily hinders it from increasing so fast as it would otherwise 
increase, and consequently from maintaining a still greater quantity 
of productive labour, and affording a still greater revenue to the in- 
dustrious inhabitants of that country. One great original source of 
revenue, therefore, the wages of labour, the monopoly must neces- 
sarily have rendered at all times less abundant than it otherwise 
would have been. 

By raising the rate of mercantile profit, the monopoly discourages 
the improvement of land. The profit of improvement depends upon 
the difference between what the land actually produces, and what, 
by the application of a certain capital, it can be made to produce. If 
this difference affords a greater profit than what can be drawn from 
an equal capital in any mercantile employment, the improvement of 
land will draw capital from all mercantile emplo3mients. If the 
profit is less, mercantile employments will draw capital from the 
improvement of land. Whatever therefore raises the rate of mer- 
cantile profit, either lessens the superiority or increases the inferior- 
ity of the profit of improvement; and in the one case hinders capital 
from going to improvement, and in the other draws capital from it. 
But by discouraging improvement, the monopoly necessarily re- 
tards the natural increase of another great original source of rev- 
enue, the rent of land. By raising the rate of profit too, the monop- 
oly necessarily keeps up the market rate of interest higher than it 
otherwise would be. But the price of land in proportion to the rent 
which it affords, the number of years purchase which is commonly 
paid for it, necessarily falls as the rate of interest rises, and rises as 
the rate of interest falls. The monopoly, therefore, hurts the interest 
of the landlord two different ways, by retarding the natural in- 
crease, first, of his rent, and secondly, of the price which he would 
get for his land in proportion to the rent which it affords. 

The monopoly, indeed, raises the rate of mercantile profit, and 
thereby augments somewhat the gain of our merchants. But as it 


The mo- 
nopoly 
reduces 
wages in 
the 

mother 

country, 


raises 
profits, 
and there- 
by tends 
to lower 
rents and 
the price 
of land. 


It re- 
duces the 



absolute 
amount 
of profit, 


thus ren- 
dering all 
the origi- 
nal 

sources of 
revenue 
less abun- 
dant 

More 
fatal still, 
It de- 
stroys 
parsi- 
mony. 


578 the wealth of nations 

obstructs the natural increase of capital, it tends rather to diminish 
than to increase the sum total of the revenue which the inhabitants 
of the country derive from the profits of stock; a small profit upon 
a great capital generally affording a greater revenue than a great 
profit upon a small one. The monopoly raises the rate of profit, but 
it hinders the sum of profit from rising so high as it otherwise would 
do. 

All the original sources of revenue, the wages of labour, the rent 
of land, and the profits of stock, the monopoly renders much less 
abundant than they otherwise would be. To promote the little in- 
terest of one little order of men in one country, it hurts the interest 
of all other orders of men in that country, and of all men in all other 
countries. 

It is solely by raising the ordinary rate of profit that the monop- 
oly either has proved or could prove advantageous to any one par- 
ticular order of men. But besides all the bad effects to the country 
in general, which have already been mentioned as necessarily re- 
sulting from a high rate of profit; there is one more fatal, perhaps, 
than all these put together, but which, if we may judge from ex- 
perience, is inseparably connected with it. The high rate of profit 
seems every where to destroy that parsimony which in other cir- 
cumstances is natural to the character of the merchant. When prof- 
its are high, that sober virtue seems to be superfluous, and expensive 
luxury to suit better the affluence of his situation. But the owners 
of the great mercantile capitals are necessarily the leaders and con- 
ductors of the whole industry of every nation, and their example 
has a much greater influence upon the manners of the whole indus- 
trious part of it than that of any other order of men. If his employer 
is attentive and parsimonious, the workman is very likely to be so 
too; but if the master is dissolute and disorderly, the servant who 
shapes his work according to the pattern which his master pre- 
scribes to him, will shape his life too according to the example which 
he sets him. Accumulation is thus prevented in the hands of all those 
who are naturally the most disposed to accumulate; and the funds 
destined for the maintenance of productive labour receive no aug- 
mentation from the revenue of those who ought naturally to aug- 
ment them the most. The capital of the country, instead of increas- 
ing, gradually dwindles away, and the quantity of productive la- 
bour maintained in it grows every day less and less. Have the exor- 
bitant profits of the merchants of Cadiz and Lisbon augmented the 
capital of Spain and Portugal? Have they alleviated the poverty, 
have they promoted the industry of those two beggarly countries? 
Such has been the tone of mercantile expence in those two trading 



579 


AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 

cities, that those exorbitant profits, far from augmenting the general 
capital of the country, seem scarce to have been sufficient to keep up 
the capitals upon which they were made. Foreign capitals are every 
day intruding themselves, if I may say so, more and more into the 
trade of Cadiz and Lisbon. It is to expel those foreign capitals from 
a trade which their own grows every day more and more insuf- 
ficient for carrying on, that the Spaniards and Portuguese endeav- 
our every day to straiten more and more the galling bands of their 
absurd monopoly. Compare the mercantile manners of Cadiz and 
Lisbon with those of Amsterdam, and you will be sensible how dif- 
ferently the conduct and character of merchants are affected by the 
high and by the low profits of stock. The merchants of London, in- 
deed, have not yet generally become such magnificent lords as those 
of Cadiz and Lisbon; but neither are they in general such attentive 
and parsimonious burghers as those of Amsterdam. They are sup- 
posed, however, many of them, to be a good deal richer than the 
greater part of the former, and not quite so rich as many of the lat- 
ter. But the rate of their profit is commonly much lower than that 
of the former, and a good deal higher than that of the latter. Light 
come light go, says the proverb; and the ordinary tone of expence 
seems every where to be regulated, not so much according to the 
real ability of spending as to the supposed facility of getting money 
to spend. 

It is thus that the single advantage which the monopoly procures 
to a single order of men, is in many different ways hurtful to the 
general interest of the country. 

To found a great empire for the sole purpose of raising up a peo- xhe 
pie of customers, may at first sight appear a project fit only for a policy of 
nation of shopkeepers. It is, however, a project altogether unfit for ^p“y'jg 
a nation of shopkeepers; but extremely fit for a nation whose gov- a policy 

ernment is influenced by shopkeepers. Such statesmen, and such of siiop- 

statesmen only,*’^ are capable of fancying that they will find some 
advantage in employing the blood and treasure of their fellow- 
citizens, to found and maintain such an empire. Say to a shop- 
keeper, Buy me a good estate, and I shall always buy my clothes at 
your shop, even though I should pay somewhat dearer than what I 
can have them for at other shops; and you will not find him very 
forward to embrace your proposal. But should any other person buy 
you such an estate, the shopkeeper would be much obliged to your 

®^Ed 1 reads “own capital ” 

®®Ed I reads “extremely fit for a nation that is governed by shopkeepers. 

Such sovereigns and such sovereigns only ” 

®®Ed. I leads “their subjects, to found and to maintain ” 



The ex- 
penditure 
of Great 
Britain 
on the 
colonies 
has all 
been laid 
out to 
siq>port 
the mo- 
nopoly, 
and is 
enormous. 


580 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

benefactor if he would enjoin you to buy all your clothes at his shop. 
England purchased for some of her subjects, who found themselves 
uneasy at home, a great estate in a distant country. The price, in- 
deed, was very small, and instead of thirty years purchase, the or- 
dinary price of land in the present times, it amounted to little more 
than the expence of the different equipments which made the first 
discovery, reconnoitred the coast, and took a fictitious possession of 
the country. The land was good and of great extent, and the culti- 
vators having plenty of good ground to work upon, and being for 
some time at liberty to sell their produce where they pleased, be- 
came in the course of little more than thirty or forty years (between 
1620 and 1660) so numerous and thriving a people, that the shop- 
keepers and other traders of England wished to secure to themselves 
the monopoly of their custom. Without pretending, therefore, that 
they had paid any part, either of the original purchase-money, or of 
the subsequent expence of improvement, they petitioned the parlia- 
ment that the cultivators of America might for the future be con- 
fined to their shop; first, for buying all the goods which they want- 
ed from Europe; and, secondly, for selling all such parts of their 
own produce as those traders might find it convenient to buy. For 
they did not find it convenient to buy every part of it. Some parts 
of it imported into England might have interfered with some of the 
trades which they themselves carried on at home. Those particular 
parts of it, therefore, they were willing that the colonists should sell 
where they could; the farther off the better; and upon that account 
proposed that their market should be confined to the countries 
south of Cape Finisterre. A clause in the famous act of navigation 
established this truly shopkeeper proposal into a law. 

The maintenance of this monopoly has hitherto been the princi- 
pal, or more properly perhaps the sole end and purpose of the do- 
minion which Great Britain assumes over her colonies. In the ex- 
clusive trade, it is supposed, consists the great advantage of prov- 
inces, which have never yet afforded either revenue or military force 
for the support of the civil government, or the defence of the mother 
country. The monopoly is the principal badge of their dependency, 
and it is the sole fruit which has hitherto been gathered from that 
dependency. Whatever expence Great Britain has hitherto laid out 
in maintaining this dependency, has really been laid out in order to 
support this monopoly. The expence of the ordinary peace estab- 
lishment of the colonies amounted, before the commencement of the 
present disturbances, to the pay of twenty regiments of foot; to the 
expence of the artillery, stores, and extraordinary provisions with 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 58i 

which it was necessary to supply them; and to the expence of a 
very considerable naval force which was constantly kept up, in or- 
der to guard, from the smuggling vessels of other nations, the im- 
mense coast of North America, and that of our West Indian islands. 

The whole expence Of this peace establishment was a charge upon 
the revenue of Great Britain, and was, at the same time, the small- 
est part of what the dominion of the colonies has cost the mother 
country. If we would know the amount of the whole, we must add 
to the annual expence of this peace establishment the interest of the 
sums which, in consequence of her considering her colonies as prov- 
inces subject to her dominion, Great Britain has upon different oc- 
casions laid out upon their defence. We must add to it, in particular, 
the whole expence of the late war, and a great part of that of the 
war which preceded The late war was altogether a colony quar- 
rel, and the whole expence of it, in whatever part of the world it 
may have been laid out, whether in Germany or the East Indies, 
ought justly to be stated to the account of the colonies. It amounted 
to more than ninety millions sterling, including not only the new 
debt which was contracted, but the two shillings in the pound addi- 
tional land tax, and the sums which were every year borrowed from 
the sinking fund. The Spanish war which began in 1739, was prin- 
cipally a colony quarrel. Its principal object was to prevent the 
search of the colony ships which carried on a contraband trade with 
the Spanish main. This whole expence is, in reality, a bounty which 
has been given in order to support a monopoly. The pretended pur- 
pose of it was to encourage the manufactures, and to increase the 
commerce of Great Britain. But its real effect has been to raise the 
rate of mercantile profit, and to enable our merchants to turn into a 
branch of trade, of which the returns are more slow and distant than 
those of the greater part of other trades, a greater proportion of 
their capital than they otherwise would have done; two events 
which if a bounty could have prevented, it might perhaps have been 
very well worth while to give such a bounty. 

Under the present system.of management, therefore. Great Brit- 
ain derives nothing but loss from the dominion which she assumes 
over her colonies. 

To propose that Great Britain should voluntarily give up all au- A volun- 
thority over her colonies, and leave them to elect their own magis- 
trates, to enact their own laws, and to make peace and war as they be 
might think proper, would be to propose such a measure as never veryad- 

Ed. I reads “is” here and in the next line. 

Ed. I reads “and a great part of that which preceded it.” 



vanta- 

geous. 


The colo- 
nies do 
not fur- 
nish near- 
ly suffi- 
cient re- 
venue to 
make 
them ad- 
vanta- 
geous. 


5S2 the wealth of nations 

was, and never will be adopted, by any nation in the world. No na- 
tion ever voluntarily gave up the dominion of any province, how 
troublesome soever it might be to govern it, and how small soever 
the revenue which it afforded might be in proportion to the expence 
which it occasioned. Such sacrifices, though they might frequently 
be agreeable to the interest, are always mortifying to the pride of 
every nation, and what is perhaps of still greater consequence, they 
are always contrary to the private interest of the governing part of 
it, who would thereby be deprived of the disposal of many places of 
trust and profit, of many opportunities of acquiring wealth and dis- 
tinction, which the possession of the most turbulent, and, to the 
great body of the people, the most unprofitable province seldom 
fails to afford. The most visionary enthusiast would scarce be cap- 
able of proposing such a measure, with any serious hopes at least of 
its ever being adopted. If it was adopted, however. Great Britain 
would not only be immediately freed from the whole annual expence 
of the peace establishment of the colonies, but might settle with 
them such a treaty of commerce as would effectually secure to her a 
free trade, more advantageous to the great body of the people, 
though less so to the merchants, than the monopoly which she at 
present enjoys. By thus parting good friends, the natural affection 
of the colonies to the mother country, which, perhaps, our late dis- 
sensions have well nigh extinguished, would quickly revive. It might 
dispose them not only to respect, for whole centuries together, that 
treaty of commerce which they had concluded with us at parting, 
but to favour us in war as well as in trade, and, instead of turbulent 
and factious subjects, to become our most faithful, affectionate, and 
generous allies; and the same sort of parental affection on the one 
side, and filial respect on the other, might revive between Great 
Britain and her colonies, which used to subsist between those of an- 
cient Greece and the mother city from which they descended. 

In order to render any province advantageous to the empire to 
which it belongs, it ought to afford, in time of peace, a revenue to 
the public sufficient not only for defraying the whole expence of its 
own peace establishment, but for contributing its proportion to the 
support of the general government of the empire. Every province 
necessarily contributes, more or less, to increase the expence of that 
general government. If any particular province, therefore, does not 
contribute its share towards defraying this expence, an unequal bur- 
den must be thrown upon some other part of the empire. The extra- 
ordinary revenue too which every province affords to the public in 
time of war, ought, from parity of reason, to bear the same propor- 
tion to the extraordinary revenue of the whole empire which its or- 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 

dinary revenue does in time of peace. That neither the ordinary nor 
extraordinary revenue which Great Britain derives from her col- 
onies, bears this proportion to the whole revenue of the British em- 
pire, will readily be allowed. The monopoly, it has been supposed, 
indeed, by increasing the private revenue of the people of Great 
Britain, and thereby enabling them to pay greater taxes, compen- 
sates the deficiency of the public revenue of the colonies. But this 
monopoly, I have endeavoured to show, though a very grievous tax 
upon the colonies, and though it may increase the revenue of a par- 
ticular order of men in Great Britain, diminishes instead of increas- 
ing that of the great body of the people; and consequently dimin- 
ishes instead of increasing the ability of the great body of the people 
to pay taxes. The men too whose revenue the monopoly increases, 
constitute a particular order, which it is both absolutely impossible 
to tax beyond the proportion of other orders, and extremely im- 
politic even to attempt to tax beyond that proportion, as I shall en- 
deavour to shew in the following book.^® No particular resource, 
therefore, can be drawn from this particular order. 

The colonies may be taxed either by their own assemblies, or by 
the parliament of Great Britain. 

That the colony assemblies can ever be so managed as to levy The colo- 
upon their constituents a public revenue sufficient, not only to main- 
tain at all times their own civil and military establishment, but to will never 
pay their proper proportion of the expence of the general govern- vote 
ment of the British empire, seems not very probable. It was a long 
time before even the parliament of England, though placed imme- 
diately under the eye of the sovereign, could be brought under such 
a system of management, or could be rendered sufficiently liberal in 
their grants for supporting the civil and military establishments 
even of their own country. It was only by distributing among the 
particular members of parliament, a great part either of the offices, 
or of the disposal of the offices arising from this civil and military 
establishment, that such a system of management could be estab- 
lished even with regard to the parliament of England. But the dis- 
tance of the colony assemblies from the eye of the sovereign, their 
number, their dispersed situation, and their various constitutions, 
would render it very difficult to manage them in the same manner, 
even though the sovereign had the same means of doing it; and 
those means are wanting. It would be absolutely impossible to dis- 
tribute among all the leading members of all the colony assemblies 
such a share, either of the offices or of the disposal of the offices aris- 
ing from the general government of the British empire, as to dispose 

Below, p. 800. 



S84 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


and have 
no 

knowl- 
edge of 
what is 
required. 


It has 
been pro- 
posed 
that par- 
liament 
should 
tax the 
colonies 
by requi- 
sition, 


them to give up their popularity at home, and to tax their constit- 
uents for the support of that general government, of which almost 
the whole emoluments were to be divided among people who were 
strangers to them. The unavoidable ignorance of administration, 
besides, concerning the relative importance of the different mem- 
bers of those different assemblies, the offences which must frequent- 
ly be given, the blunders which must constantly be committed in at- 
tempting to manage them in this manner, seems to render such a 
system of management altogether impracticable with regard to 
them. 

The colony assemblies, besides, cannot be supposed the proper 
judges of what is necessary for the defence and support of the whole 
empire. The care of that defence and support is not entrusted to 
them. It is not their business, and they have no regular means of in- 
formation concerning it. The assembly of a province, like the vestry 
of a parish, may judge very properly concerning the affairs of its 
own particular district; but can have no proper means of judging 
concerning those of the whole empire. It cannot even judge prop- 
erly concerning the proportion which its own province bears to the 
whole empire; or concerning the relative degree of its wealth and 
importance, compared with the other provinces; because those 
other provinces are not under the inspection and superintendency 
of the assembly of a particular province. What is necessary for the 
defence and support of the whole empire, and in what proportion 
each part ought to contribute, can be judged of only by that assem- 
bly which inspects and superintends the affairs of the whole empire. 

It has been proposed, accordingly, that the colonies should be 
taxed by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain determining 
the sum which each colony ought to pay, and the provincial assem- 
bly assessing and levying it in the way that suited best the circum- 
stances of the province. What concerned the whole empire would 
in this way be determined by the assembly which inspects and su- 
perintends the affairs of the whole empire; and the provincial 
affairs of each colony might still be regulated by its own assembly. 
Though the colonies should in this case have no representatives in 
the British parliament, yet, if we may judge by experience, there is 
no probability that the parliamentary requisition would be unrea- 
sonable. The parliament of England has not upon any occasion 
shown the smallest disposition to overburden those parts of the em- 
pire which are not represented in parliament. The islands of Guern- 
sey and Jersey, without any means of resisting the authority of 
parliament, are more lightly taxed than any part of Great Britain. 


Ed. I reads “seem 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 

Parliament in attempting to exercise its supposed right, whether 
well or ill grounded, of taxing the colonies, has never hitherto de- 
manded of them any thing which even approached to a just propor- 
tion to what was paid by their fellow-subjects at home. If the con- 
tribution of the colonies, besides, was to rise or fall in proportion to 
the rise or fall of the land tax, parliament could not tax them with- 
out taxing at the same time its own constituents, and the colonies 
might in this case be considered as virtually represented in parlia- 
ment. 

Examples are not wanting of empires in which all the different 
provinces are not taxed, if I may be allowed the expression, in one 
mass; but in which the sovereign regulates the sum which each pro- 
vince ought to pay, and in some provinces assesses and levies it as 
he thinks proper; while in others, he leaves it to be assessed and 
levied as the respective states of each province shall determine. In 
some provinces of France, the king not only imposes what taxes he 
thinks proper, but assesses and levies them in the way he thinks 
proper. From others he demands a certain sum, but leaves it to the 
states of each province to assess and levy that sum as they think 
proper. According to the scheme of taxing by requisition, the 
parliament of Great Britain would stand nearly in the same situa- 
tion towards the colony assemblies, as the king of France does to- 
wards the states of those provinces which still enjoy the privilege 
of having states of their own, the provinces of France which are 
supposed to be the best governed. 

But though, according to this scheme, the colonies could have no 
just reason to fear that their share of the public burdens should 
ever exceed the proper proportion to that of their fellow-citizens at 
home; Great Britain might have just reason to fear that it never 
would amount to that proper proportion. The parliament of Great 
Britain has not for some time past had the same established author- 
ity in the colonies, which the French king has in those provinces of 
France which still enjoy the privilege of having states of their own. 
The colony assemblies, if they were not very favourably disposed 
(and unless more skilfully managed than they ever have been 
hitherto, they are not very likely to be so), might still find many 
pretences for evading or rejecting the most reasonable requisitions 
of parliament. A French war breaks out, we shall suppose; ten 
millions must immediately be raised, in order to defend the seat of 
the empire. This sum must be borrowed upon the credit of some 
parliamentary fund mortgaged for pa5n[ng the interest. Part of this 
fund parliament proposes to raise by a tax to be levied in Great 
Britain, and part of it by a requisition to all the different colony 


as the 
King of 
France 
taxes 
some of 
his pro- 
vinces, 


hut par- 
liament 
has not 
sufficient 
authority, 



and re- 
sistance 
breaks 
out. 


$86 the wealth of NATIONS 

assemblies of America and the West Indies. Would people readily 
advance their money upon the credit of a fund, which partly de- 
pended upon the good humour of all those assemblies, far distant 
from the seat of the war, and sometimes, perhaps, thinking them- 
selves not much concerned in the event of it? Upon such a fund no 
more money would probably be advanced than what the tax to be 
levied in Great Britain might be supposed to answer for. The whole 
burden of the debt contracted on account of the war would in this 
manner fall, as it always has done hitherto, upon Great Britain; 
upon a part of the empire, and not upon the whole empire. Great 
Britain is, perhaps, since the world began, the only state which, as 
it has extended its empire, has only increased its expence without 
once augmenting its resources. Other states have generally disbur- 
dened themselves upon their subjett and subordinate provinces of 
the most considerable part of the expence of defending the empire. 
Great Britain has hitherto suffered her subject and subordinate 
provinces to disburden themselves upon her of almost this whole 
expence. In order to put Great Britain upon a footing of equality 
with her own colonies, which the law has hitherto supposed to be 
subject and subordinate, it seems necessary, upon the scheme of 
taxing them by parliamentary requisition, that parliament should 
have some means of rendering its requisitions immediately effect- 
ual, in case the colony assemblies should attempt to evade or reject 
them; and what those means are, it is not very easy to conceive, 
and it has not yet been explained. 

Should the parliament of Great Britain, at the same time, be 
ever fully established in the right of taxing the colonies, even inde- 
pendent of the consent of their own assemblies, the importance of 
those assemblies would from that moment be at an end, and with it, 
that of all the leading men of British America. Men desire to have 
some share in the management of public affairs chiefly on account 
of the importance which it gives them. Upon the power which the 
greater part of the leading men, the natural aristocracy of every 
country, have of preserving or defending their respective impor- 
tance, depends the stability and duration of every system of free 
government. In the attacks which those leading men are contin- 
ually making upon the importance of one another, and in the de- 
fence of their own, consists the whole play of domestic faction and 
ambition. The leading men of America, like those of all other 
countries, desire to preserve their own importance. They feel, or 
imagine, that if their assemblies, which they are fond of calling 
parliaments, and of considering as equal in authority to the parlia- 
ment of Great Britain, should be so far degraded as to become the 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 5^7 

humble ministers and executive officers of that parliament, the 
greater part of their own importance would be at an end. They have 
rejected, therefore, the proposal of being taxed by parliamentary 
requisition, and like other ambitious and high-spirited men, have 
rather chosen to draw the sword in defence of their own importance. 

Towards the declension of the Roman republic, the allies of Repre- 

Rome, who had borne the principal burden of defending the state ?entation 

and extending the empire, demanded to be admitted to all the priv- men^in ' 
ileges of Roman citizens. Upon being refused, the social war broke propor- 
out. During the course of that war Rome granted those privileges 
to the greater part of them, one by one, and in proportion as they should be 
detached themselves from the general confederacy. The parliament offered, 
of Great Britain insists upon taxing the colonies; and they refuse 
to be taxed by a parliament in which they are not represented. If to 
each colony, which should detach itself from the general confeder- 
acy, Great Britain should allow such a number of representatives as 
suited the proportion of what it contributed to the public revenue 
of the empire, in consequence of its being subjected to the same 
taxes, and in compensation admitted to the same freedom of trade 
with its fellow-subjects at home; the number of its representatives 
to be augmented as the proportion of its contribution might after- 
wards augment; a new method of acquiring importance, a new and 
more dazzling object of ambition would be presented to the leading 
men of each colony. Instead of piddling for the little prizes which 
are to be found in what may be called the paltry raffle of colony 
faction; they might then hope, from the presumption which men 
naturally have in their own ability and good fortune, to draw some 
of the great prizes which sometimes come from the wheel of the 
great state lottery of British politics. Unless this or some other Otherwise 
' method is fallen upon, and there seems to be none more obvious 
than this, of preserving the importance and of gratifying the ambi- to expect 

tion of the leading men of America, it is not very probable that they submis- 

will ever voluntarily submit to us; and we ought to consider that ’ 
the blood which must be shed in forcing them to do so, is, every 
drop of it, the blood either of those who are, or of those whom we 
wish to have for our fellow-citizens. They are very weak who flat- 
ter themselves that, in the state to which things have come, our col- 
onies will be easily conquered by force alone. The persons who now 
govern the resolutions of what they call their continental congress, 
feel in themselves at this moment a degree of importance which, 
perhaps the greatest subjects in Europe scarce feel. From shop- 
keepers, tradesmen, and attornies, they are become statesmen and 
legislators, and are employed in contriving a new form of gov- 



and re- 
sistance 
will be as 
obstinate 
as that of 
Paris. 


The dis- 
covery of 
represen- 
tation 


S8S XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

eminent for an extensive empire, which, they flatter themselves, 
will become, and which, indeed, seems very likely to become, one of 
the greatest and most formidable that ever was in the world. Five 
hundred different people, perhaps, who in different ways act imme- 
diately under the continental congress; and five hundred thousand, 
perhaps, who act under those five hundred, all feel in the same 
manner a proportionable rise in their own importance. Almost 
every individual of the governing party in America, fills, at present 
in his own fancy, a station superior, not only to what he had ever 
filled before, but to what he had ever expected to fill; and unless 
some new object of ambition is presented either to him or to his 
leaders, if he has the ordinary spirit of a man, he will die in defence 
of that station. 

It is a remark of the president Henaut, that we now read with 
pleasure the account of many little transactions of the Ligue, which 
when they happened were not perhaps considered as very important 
pieces of news. But every man then, says he, fancied himself of 
some importance; and the innumerable memoirs which have come 
down to us from those times were, the greater part of them, written 
by people who took pleasure in recording and magnifying events in 
which, they flattered themselves, they had been considerable 
actors.^® How obstinately the city of Paris upon that occasion de- 
fended itself, what a dreadful famine it supported rather than sub- 
mit to the best and afterwards the most beloved of all the French 
kings, is well known. The greater part of the citizens, or those who 
governed the greater part of them, fought in defence of their own 
importance, which they foresaw was to be at an end whenever the 
ancient government should be re-established. Our colonies, unless 
they can be induced to consent to a union, are very likely to defend 
themselves against the best of all mother countries, as obstinately 
as the city of Paris did against one of the best of kings. 

The idea of representation was unknown in ancient times. When 
the people of one state were admitted to the right of citizenship in 
another, they had no other means of exercising that right but by 

®®“Aucun des regnes precedents n’a fourni plus de volumes, plus d’anec- 
dotes, plus d’estampes, plus de pikes fugitives, etc. II y a dans tout cela bien 
des choses inutiles; mais comme Henri III, vivait au milieu dc son peuple, 
aucun detail des actions de sa vie n’a echappe a la curiosit6; et comme Paris 
etait le th6S,tre des principaux evenements de la ligue, les bourgeois qui y 
avaient la plus grande part, conservaient soigneusement les moindres faits qui 
se passaient sous leurs yeux; tout ce qu’ils voyaient leur paraissait grand, 
parce qu’ils y participaient, et nous sommes curieux, sur parole, de faits dont 
la plupart ne faisaient peut-etre pas alors une grande nouvelle dans le monde.” 
— C. J. F. Hkault, Nouvel Abrigi chronologique de Vhistoire de France, nouv. 
ed., 1768, p. 473, A.D. 1589. 

“ Eds. 4 and 5 erroneously insert “to” here. 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 5^9 

coming in a body to vote and deliberate with the people of that 
other state. The admission of the greater part of the inhabitants of 
Italy to the privileges of Roman citizens, completely ruined the 
Roman republic. It was no longer possible to distinguish between 
who was and who was not a Roman citizen. No tribe could know its 
own members. A rabble of any kind could be introduced into the 
assemblies of the people, could drive out the real citizens, and de- 
cide upon the affairs of the republic as if they themselves had been 
such. But though America were^^® to send fifty new representatives 
to parliament, the door-keeper of the house of commons could 
not find any great difficulty in distinguishing between who was and 
who was not a member. Though the Roman constitution, therefore, 
was necessarily ruined by the union of Rome with the allied states 
of Italy, there is not the least probability that the British constitu- 
tion would be hurt by the union of Great Britain with her colonies. 
That constitution, on the contrary, would be completed by it, and 
seems to be imperfect without it. The assembly which deliberates 
and decides concerning the affairs of every part of the empire, in 
order to be properly informed, ought certainly to have representa- 
tives from every part of it. That this union, however, could be eas- 
ily effectuated, or that difficulties and great difficulties might not 
occur in the execution, I do not pretend. I have yet heard of none, 
however, which appear insurmountable. The principal perhaps 
arise, not from the nature of things, but from tie prejudices and 
opinions of the people both on this and on the other side of the 
Atlantic. 

We, on this side the water, are afraid lest the multitude of Ameri- 
can representatives should overturn the balance of the constitution, 
and increase too much either the influence of the crown on the one 
hand, or the force of the democracy on the other. But if the number 
of American representatives were to be in proportion to the pro- 
duce of American taxation, the number of people to be managed 
would increase exactly in proportion to the means of managing 
them; and the means of managing, to the number of people to be 
managed. The monarchical and democratical parts of the constitu- 
tion would, after the union, stand exactly in the same degree of rel- 
ative force with regard to one another as they had done before. 

The people on the other side of the water are afraid lest their 
distance from the seat of government might expose them to many 
oppressions. But their representatives in parliament, of which the 
number ought from the first to be considerable, would easily be 
able to protect them from all oppression. The distance could not 

^°®Eds. 1-3 read “was.” ^“^Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 


makes the 
case dif- 
ferent 
from that 
of Rome 
and 
Italy. 


The 

American 
repre- 
sentatives 
could be 
managed. 


The 
Ameri- 
cans 
would 
not be 
oppressed. 



The dis- 
covery of 
America 
and the 
Cape pas- 
sage are 
the great- 
est events 
in his- 
tory: the 
misfor- 
tunes of 
the na- 
tives of 
the East 
and West 
Indies 
maybe 
tempo- 
rary, so 
the re- 
sults may 
be bene- 
ficial to 
all. 


590 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

much weaken the dependency of the representatives upon the con- 
stituent, and the former would still feel that he owed his seat in 
parliament, and all the consequence which he derived from it, to 
the good-will of the latter. It would be the interest of the former, 
therefore, to cultivate that good-will by complaining, with all the 
authority of a member of the legislature, of every outrage which 
any civil or military officer might be guilty of in those remote parts 
of the empire. The distance of America from the seat of govern- 
ment, besides, the natives of that country might flatter them- 
selves, with some appearance of reason too, would not be of very 
long continuance. Such has hitherto been the rapid progress of that 
country in wealth, population and improvement, that in the course 
of little more than a century, perhaps, the produce of American 
might exceed that of British taxation. The seat of the empire would 
then naturally remove itself to that part of the empire which con- 
tributed most to the general defence and support of the whole. 

The discovery of America, and that of a passage to the East In- 
dies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest and most im- 
portant events recorded in the history of mankind.^^^ Their conse- 
quences have already been very great: but, in the short period of 
between two and three centuries which has elapsed since these dis- 
coveries were made, it is impossible that the whole extent of their 
consequences can have been seen. What benefits, or what misfor- 
tunes to mankind may hereafter result from those great events, no 
human wisdom can foresee. By uniting, in some measure, the most 
distant parts of the world, by enabling them to relieve one another’s 
wants, to increase one another’s enjoyments, and to encourage one 
another’s industry, their general tendency would seem to be bene- 
ficial. To the natives, however, both of the East and West Indies, 
all the commercial benefits which can have resulted from those 
events have been sunk and lost in the dreadful misfortunes which 
they have occasioned. These misfortunes, however, seem to have 
arisen rather from accident than from any thing in the nature of 
those events themselves. At the particular time when these dis- 
coveries were made, the superiority of force happened to be so great 
on the side of the Europeans, that they were enabled to commit 
with impunity every sort of injustice in those remote countries. 

^ Ed. I reads “nations.” 

“®Raynal begins Im ffistoire pUlosophique with the words “II n^y a point 
eu d’ev 6 neinent aussi interessant pour I’espece humaine en general et pour 
les peuples de I’Europe en particulier, que la decouverte du nouveau monde 
et le passage aux Indes par le Cap de Bonne-Esperance. Alors a commence 
une revolution dans le commerce, dans la puissance des nations, dans les 
mceurs, Tindustrie et le gouvernement de tous les peuples ” 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 59^ 

Hereafter, perhaps, the natives of those countries may grow strong- 
er, or those of Europe may grow weaker, and the inhabitants of all 
the different quarters of the world may arrive at that equality of 
courage and force which, by inspiring mutual fear, can alone over- 
awe the injustice of independent nations into some sort of respect 
for the rights of one another. But nothing seems more likely to es- 
tablish this equality of force than that mutual communication of 
knowledge and of all sorts of improvements which an extensive 
commerce from all countries to all countries naturally, or rather 
necessarily, carries along with it. 

In the mean time one of the principal effects of those discoveries 
has been to raise the mercantile system to a degree of splendour 
and glory which it could never otherwise have attained to. It is the 
object of that system to enrich a great nation rather by trade and 
manufactures than by the improvement and cultivation of land, 
rather by the industry of the towns than by that of the country. 
But, in consequence of those discoveries, the commercial towns of 
Europe, instead of being the manufacturers and carriers for but a 
very small part of the world (that part of Europe which is washed 
by the Atlantic ocean, and the countries which lie round the Baltic 
and Mediterranean seas), have now become the manufacturers for 
the numerous and thriving cultivators of America, and the carriers, 
and in some respects the manufacturers too, for almost all the dif- 
ferent nations of Asia, Africa, and America. Two new worlds have 
been opened to their industry, each of them much greater and more 
extensive than the old one, and the market of one of them growing 
still greater and greater every day. 

The countries which possess the colonies of America, and which 
trade directly to the East Indies, enjoy, indeed, the whole shew and 
splendour of this great commerce. Other countries, however, not- 
withstanding all the invidious restraints by which it is meant to ex- 
clude them, frequently enjoy a greater share of the real benefit of 
it. The colonies of Spain and Portugal, for example, give more real 
encouragement to the industry of other countries that to that of 
Spain and Portugal. In the single article of linen alone the con- 
sumption of those colonies amounts, it is said, but I do not pretend 
to warrant the quantity, to more than three millions sterling a year. 
But this great consumption is almost entirely supplied by France, 
Flanders, Holland, and Germany. Spain and Portugal furnish but 
a small part of it. The capital which supplies the colonies with this 
great quantity of linen is annually distributed among, and fur- 
nishes a revenue to the inhabitants of those other countries. The 
profits of it only are spent in Spain and Portugal, where they help 


Mean- 
time the 
discovery 
has ex- 
alted the 
mercan- 
tile sys- 
tem. 


The coun- 
tries 
which 
possess 
America 
and trade 
to the 
East 
Indies 
appear to 
get all the 
advan- 
tage, but 
this is not 
the case. 



The mo- 
nopoly 
regula- 
tions 

sometimes 
harm the 
country 
which 
establish- 
es them 
more than 
others. 


The 
mother 
countries 
have en- 
grossed 
only the 
expense 
andin- 
conve- 
niencies 
of pos- 
sessing 
colonies. 


592 the wealth of nations 

to support the sumptuous profusion of the merchants of Cadiz and 
Lisbon. 

Even the regulations by which each nation endeavours to secure 
to itself the exclusive trade of its own colonies, are frequently more 
hurtful to the countries in favour of which they are established 
than to those against which they are established. The unjust op- 
pression of the industry of other countries falls back, if I may say 
so, upon the heads of the oppressors, and crushes their industry 
more than it does that of those other countries. By those regula- 
tions, for example, the merchant of Hamburgh must send the linen 
which he destines for the American market to London, and he must 
bring back from thence the tobacco which he destines for the Ger- 
man market; because he can neither send the one directly to Am- 
erica, nor bring back the other directly from thence. By this 
restraint he is probably obliged to sell the one somewhat cheaper, 
and to buy the other somewhat dearer than he otherwise might have 
done; and his profits are probably somewhat abridged by means of 
it. In this trade, however, between Hamburgh and London, he cer- 
tainly receives the returns of his capital much more quickly than 
he could possibly have done in the direct trade to America, even 
though we should suppose, what is by no means the case, that the 
payments of America were as punctual as those of London. In the 
trade, therefore, to which those regulations confine the merchant 
of Hamburgh, his capital can keep in constant employment a much 
greater quantity of German industry than it possibly could have 
done in the trade from which he is excluded. Though the one em- 
ployment, therefore, may to him perhaps be less profitable than 
the other, it cannot be less advantageous to his country. It is quite 
otherwise with the emplo5mient into which the monopoly naturally 
attracts, if I may say so, the capital of the London merchant. That 
employment may, perhaps, be more profitable to him than the 
greater part of other employments, but, on account of the slowness 
of the returns, it cannot be more advantageous to his country. 

After all the unjust attempts, therefore, of every country in 
Europe to engross to itself the whole advantage of the trade of its 
own colonies, no country has yet been able to engross to itself any 
thing but the expence of supporting in time of peace and of de- 
fending in time of war the oppressive authority which it assumes 
over them. The inconveniencies resulting from the possession of its 
colonies, every country has engrossed to itself completely. The ad- 
vantages resulting from their trade it has been obliged to share 
with many other countries. 

At first sight, no doubt, the monopoly of the great commerce of 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 593 

America, naturally seems to be an acquisition of the highest value. 
To the undiscerning eye of giddy ambition, it naturally presents it- 
self amidst the confused scramble of politics and war, as a very 
dazzling object to fight for. The dazzling splendour of the object, 
however, the immense greatness of the commerce, is the very qual- 
ity which renders the monopoly of it hurtful, or which makes one 
emplo3mient, in its own nature necessarily less advantageous to the 
country than the greater part of other employments, absorb a much 
greater proportion of the capital of the country than what would 
otherwise have gone to it. 

The mercantile stock of every country, it has been shewn in the 
second book,^®^ naturally seeks, if one may say so, the employ- 
ment most advantageous to that country. If it is employed in the 
carrying trade, the country to which it belongs becomes the em- 
porium of the goods of all the countries whose trade that stock 
carries on. But the owner of that stock necessarily wishes to dispose 
of as great a part of those goods as he can at home. He thereby 
saves himself the trouble, risk, and expence of exportation, and he 
will upon that account be glad to sell them at home, not only for a 
much smaller price, but with somewhat a smaller profit than he 
might expect to make by sending them abroad. He naturally, there- 
fore, endeavours as much as he can to turn his carrying trade into a 
foreign trade of consumption. If his stock again is employed in a 
foreign trade of consumption, he will, for the same reason, be glad 
to dispose of at home as great a part as he can of the home goods, 
which he collects in order to export to some foreign market, and he 
will thus endeavour, as much as he can, to turn his foreign trade of 
consumption into a home trade. The mercantile stock of every 
country naturally courts in this manner the near, and shuns the dis- 
tant employment; naturally courts the employment in which the 
returns are frequent, and shuns that in which they are distant and 
slow; naturally courts the employment in which it can maintain the 
greatest quantity of productive labour in the country to which it 
belongs, or in which its owner resides, and shuns that in which it 
can maintain there the smallest quantity. It naturally courts the 
employment which in ordinary cases is most advantageous, and 
shuns that which in ordinary cases is least advantageous to that 
country. 

But if in any of those distant employments, which in ordinary 
cases are less advantageous to the country, the profit should hap- 
pen to rise somewhat higher than what is sufficient to balance the 
natural preference which is given to nearer employments, this 

Above, pp. 34I-3SS- 


The mo- 
nopoly of 
American 
trade is a 
darling 
object. 


The stock 
of a 

country 
naturally 
seeks the 
employ- 
ment 
most ad' 
vanta- 
geous to 
the coun- 
try, 


preferring 
the near 
to the 
more dis- 
tant em- 
ploy- 
ments, 


unless 
profits are 
higher in 
the more 
distant, 



594 


which in- 
dicates 
that the 
more dis- 
tant em- 
ployment 
is neces- 
sary. 


If too 
much 
goes to 
any em- 
ployment, 
profit 
falls in 
that em- 
ployment 
and the 
proper 
distribu- 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

superiority of profit will draw stock from those nearer employ- 
ments, till the profits of all return to their proper level. This super- 
iority of profit, however, is a proof that, in the actual circumstances 
of the society, those distant emplo5anents are somewhat under- 
stocked in proportion to other employments, and that the stock of 
the society is not distributed in the properest manner among all the 
different employments carried on in it. It is a proof that something 
is either bought cheaper or sold dearer than it ought to be, and that 
some particular class of citizens is more or less oppressed either by 
paying more or by getting less than what is suitable to that equal- 
ity, which ought to take place, and which naturally does take place 
among all the different classes of them. Though the same capital 
never will maintain the same quantity of productive labour in a 
distant as in a near employment, yet a distant employment may be 
as necessary for the welfare of the society as a near one; the goods 
which the distant employment deals in being necessary, perhaps, 
for carrying on many of the nearer employments. But if the profits 
of those who deal in such goods are above their proper level, those 
goods will be sold dearer than they ought to be, or somewhat above 
their natural price, and all those engaged in the nearer employ- 
ments will be more or less oppressed by this high price. Their in- 
terest, therefore, in this case requires that some stock should be 
withdrawn from those nearer employments, and turned towards 
that distant one, in order to reduce its profits to their proper 
level, and the price of the goods which it deals in to their natural 
price. In this extraordinary case, the public interest requires that 
some stock should be withdrawn from those employments which 
in ordinary cases are more advantageous, and turned towards one 
which in ordinary cases is less advantageous to the public: and in 
this extraordinary case, the natural interests and inclinations of 
men coincide as exactly with the public interest as in all other or- 
dinary cases, and lead them to withdraw stock from the near, and 
to turn it towards the distant employment. 

It is thus that the private interests and passions of individuals 
naturally dispose them to turn their stock towards the employ- 
nients which in ordinary cases are most advantageous to the so- 
ciety. But if from this natural preference they should turn too 
much of it towards those employments, the fall of profit in them 
and the rise of it in all others immediately dispose them to alter 
this faulty distribution. Without any intervention of law, there- 
fore, the private interests and passions of men naturally lead them 
to divide and distribute the stock of every society, among all the 

Ed. I reads “distant employment.” 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 595 

different employments carried on in it, as nearly as possible in the 
proportion which is most agreeable to the interest of the whole 
society. 

All the different regulations of the mercantile system, necessar- 
ily derange more or less this natural and most advantageous dis- 
tribution of stock. But those which concern the trade to America 
and the East Indies derange it perhaps more than any other; be- 
cause the trade to those two great continents absorbs a greater 
quantity of stock than any two other branches of trade. The regu- 
lations, however, by which this derangement is effected in those 
two different branches of trade are not altogether the same. Mon- 
opoly is the great engine of both; but it is a different sort of mon- 
opoly. Monopoly of one kind or another, indeed, seems to be the 
sole engine of the mercantile system. 

In the trade to America every nation endeavours to engross as 
much as possible the whole market of its own colonies, by fairly 
excluding all other nations from any direct trade to them. During 
the greater part of the sixteenth century, the Portugueze endeav- 
oured to manage the trade to the East Indies in the same manner, 
by claiming the sole right of sailing in the Indian seas, on account of 
the merit of having first found out the road to them. The Dutch 
still continue to exclude all other European nations from any di- 
rect trade to their spice islands. Monopolies of this kind are evi- 
dently established against all other European nations, who are 
thereby not only excluded from a trade to which it might be con- 
venient for them to turn some part of their stock, but are obliged 
to buy the goods which that trade deals in somewhat dearer, than 
if they could import them themselves directly from the countries 
which produce them. 

But since the fall of the power of Portugal, no European nation 
has claimed the exclusive right of sailing in the Indian seas, of 
which the principal ports are now open to the ships of all Euro- 
pean nations. Except in Portugal,’^^’’ however, and within these 
few years in France,^ the trade to the East Indies has in every 
European country been subjected to an exclusive company. Mon- 
opolies of this kind are properly established against the very na- 
tion which erects them. The greater part of that nation are thereby 
not only excluded from a trade to which it might be convenient 
for them to turn some part of their stock, but are obliged to buy 
the goods which that trade deals in, somewhat dearer than if it 

See below, p. 598. 

'^^’’The monopoly of the French East India Company was abolished in 1769. 
—See the Continuation of Anderson’s Commerce, 1801, vol. iv., p. 128. 


tion is 
soon re- 
stored. 

The mer- 
cantile 
system 
disturbs 
this dis- 
tribution, 
especially 
in regard 
to Amer- 
ican and 
Indian 
trade. 


The Por- 
tuguese 
attempted 
at first to 
exclude 
all other 
nations 
from 
trading in 
the In- 
dian Seas, 
and the 
Dutch 
still ex- 
clude all 
other na- 
tions 
from 
trade 
with the * 
Spice 
Islands. 

Now the 
principal 
ports arc 
open, but 
each 
country 
has estab- 
lished an 
exclusive 
company. 



Monopo- 
lies of the 
American 
kind al- 
ways at- 
tract, but 
monopo- 
lies of ex- 
clusive 
com- 
panies 
some- 
times at- 
tract, 
some- 
times 
repel 
stock. 


In poor 
countries 
they at- 
tract, 


in rich 

they 

repel. 


596 the wealth of nations 

was open and free to all their countrymen. Since the establishment 
of the English East India company, for example, the other inhabi- 
tants of England, over and above being excluded from the trade, 
must have paid in the price of the East India goods which they 
have consumed, not only for all the extraordinary profits which the 
company may have made upon those goods in consequence of their 
monopoly, but for all the extraordinary waste which the fraud and 
abuse, inseparable from the management of the affairs of so great a 
company, must necessarily have occasioned. The absurdity of this 
second kind of monopoly, therefore, is much more manifest than 
that of the first. 

Both these kinds of monopolies derange more or less the natural 
distribution of the stock of the society: but they do not always de- 
range it in the same way. 

Monopolies of the first kind always attract to the particular 
trade in which they are established, a greater proportion of the 
stock of the society than what would go to that trade of its own 
accord. 

Monopolies of the second kind may sometimes attract stock to- 
wards the particular trade in which they are established, and some- 
times repel it from that trade according to different circumstances. 
In poor countries they naturally attract towards that trade more 
stock than would otherwise go to it. In rich countries they natu- 
rally repel from it a good deal of stock which would otherwise go 
to it. 

Such poor countries as Sweden and Denmark, for example, 
would probably have never sent a single ship to the East Indies, 
had not the trade been subjected to an exclusive company. The es- 
tablishment of such a company necessarily encourages adventur- 
ers. Their monopoly secures them against all competitors in the 
home market, and they have the same chance for foreign markets 
with the traders of other nations. Their monopoly shows them the 
certainty of a great profit upon a considerable quantity of goods, 
and the chance of a considerable profit upon a great quantity. 
Without such extraordinary encouragement, the poor traders of 
such poor countries would probably never have thought of hazard- 
ing their small capitals in so very distant and uncertain an adven- 
ture as the trade to the East Indies must naturally have appeared 
to them. 

Such a rich country as Holland, on the contrary, would prob- 
ably, in the case of a free trade, send many more ships to the East 
Indies than it actually does. The limited stock of the Dutch East 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 597 

India company probably repels from that trade many great mer- 
cantile capitals which would otherwise go to it. The mercantile 
capital of Holland is so great that it is, as it were, continually over- 
flowing, sometimes into the public funds of foreign countries, some- 
times into loans to private traders and adventurers of foreign coun- 
tries, sometimes into the most roundabout foreign trades of con- 
sumption, and sometimes into the carrying trade. All near employ- 
ments being completely filled up, all the capital which can be 
placed in them with any tolerable profit being already placed in 
them, the capital of Holland necessarily flows towards the most dis- 
tant employments. The trade to the East Indies, if it were alto- 
gether free, would probably absorb the greater part of this re- 
dundant capital. The East Indies offer a market both for the 
manufactures of Europe and for the gold and silver as well as for 
several other productions of America, greater and more extensive 
than both Europe and America put together. 

Every derangement of the natural distribution of stock is neces- 
sarily hurtful to the society in which it takes place; whether it be 
by repelling from a particular trade the stock which would other- 
wise go to it, or by attracting towards a particular trade that which 
would not otherwise come to it. If, without any exclusive com- 
pany, the trade of Holland to the East Indies would be greater than 
it actually is, that country must suffer a considerable loss by part 
of its capital being excluded from the employment most convenient 
for that part. And in the same manner, if, without an exclusive 
company, the trade of Sweden and Denmark to the East Indies 
would be less than it actually is, or, what perhaps is more probable, 
would not exist at all, those two countries must likewise suffer a 
considerable loss by part of their capital being drawn into an em- 
ployment which must be more or less unsuitable to their present 
circumstances. Better for them, perhaps, in their present circum- 
stances, to buy East India goods of other nations, even though they 
should pay somewhat dearer, than to turn so great a part of their 
small capital to so very distant a trade, in which the returns are so 
very slow, in which that capital can maintain so small a quantity of 
productive labour at home, where productive labour is so much 
wanted, where so little is done, and where so much is to do. 

Though without an exclusive company, therefore, a particular 
country should not be able to carry on any direct trade to the East 
Indies, it will not from thence follow that such a company ought to 

’^^Raynal, Histoire philoi^ophique, ed. Amsterdam, 1773, tom. p. 203, 
gives the original capital as 6,459,840 florins. 

Eds. 1-3 read *‘if it was.” 


Both ef- 
fects are 
hurtful, 


A country 
which 
cannot 
trade to 



the East 
Indies 
without 
an exclu- 
sive com- 
pany 
should 
not trade 
there. 

The idea 
that the 
large 
capital of 
a com- 
pany is 
necessary 
is falla- 
cious. 


59S THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

be established there, but only that such a country ought not in these 
circumstances to trade directly to the East Indies. That such com- 
panies are not in general necessary for carrying on the East India 
trade, is sufficiently demonstrated by the experience of the Portu- 
gueze, who enjoyed almost the whole of it for more than a century 
together without any exclusive company. 

No private merchant, it has been said, could well have capital 
sufficient to maintain factors and agents in the different ports of the 
East Indies, in order to provide goods for the ships which he might 
occasionally send thither; and yet, unless he was able to do this, 
the difificulty of finding a cargo might frequently make his ships 
lose the season for returning, and the expence of so long a delay 
would not only eat up the whole profit of the adventure, but fre- 
quently occasion a very considerable loss. This argument, how- 
ever, if it proved any thing at all, would prove that no one great 
branch of trade could be carried on without an exclusive company, 
which is contrary to the experience of all nations. There is no great 
branch of trade in which the capital of any one private merchant is 
sufficient, for carrying on all the subordinate branches which must 
be carried on, in order to carry on the principal one.^^^ But when a 
nation is ripe for any great branch of trade, some merchants natu- 
rally turn their capitals towards the principal, and some towards 
the subordinate branches of it; and though all the different 
branches of it are in this manner carried on, yet it very seldom 
happens that they are all carried on by the capital of one private 
merchant. If a nation, therefore, is ripe for the East India trade, a 
certain portion of its capital will naturally divide itself among all 
the different branches of that trade. Some of its merchants will 
find it for their interest to reside in the East Indies, and to employ 
their capitals there in providing goods for the ships which are to 
be sent out by other merchants who reside in Europe. The settle- 
ments which different European nations have obtained in the East 
Indies, if they were taken from the exclusive companies to which 
they at present belong, and put under the immediate protection of 
the sovereign, would render this residence both safe and easy, at 
least to the merchants of the particular nations to whom those set- 
tlements belong. If at any particular time that part of the capital 
of any country which of its own accord tended and inclined, if I 
may say so, towards the East India trade, was not sufficient for 
carrying on all those different branches of it, it would be a proof 
that, at that particular time, that country was not ripe for that 
trade, and that it would do better to buy for some time, even at a 
Ed. I reads “the principal branch.’^ 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 599 

higher price, from other European nations, the East India goods it 
had occasion for, than to import them itself directly from the East 
Indies. What it might lose by the high price of those goods could 
seldom be equal to the loss which it would sustain by the distrac- 
tion of a large portion of its capital from other employments more 
necessary, or more useful, or more suitable to its circumstances and 
situation, than a direct trade to the East Indies. 

Though the Europeans possess many considerable settlements 
both upon the coast of Africa and in the East Indies, they have not 
yet established in either of those countries such numerous and 
thriving colonies as those in the islands and continent of Amer- 
ica. Africa, however, as well as several of the countries compre- 
hended under the general name of the East Indies, are inhabited 
by barbarous nations. But those nations were by no means so weak 
and defenceless as the miserable and helpless Americans; and in 
proportion to the natural fertility of the countries which they in- 
habited, they were besides much more populous. The most bar- 
barous nations either of Africa or of the East Indies were shep- 
herds; even the Hottentots were so.^^^ But the natives of every 
part of America, except Mexico and Peru, were only hunters; and 
the difference is very great between the number of shepherds and 
that of hunters whom the same extent of equally fertile territory 
can maintain. In Africa and the East Indies, therefore, it was more 
difficult to displace the natives, and to extend the European plan- 
tations over the greater part of the lands of the original inhabi- 
tants. The genius of exclusive companies, besides, is unfavourable, 
it has already been observed,^ to the growth of new colonies, and 
has probably been the principal cause of the little progress which 
they have made- in the East Indies. The Portugueze carried on the 
trade both to Africa and the East Indies without any exclusive 
companies, and their settlements at Congo, Angola, and Benguela 
on the coast of Africa, and at Goa in the East Indies, though much 
depressed by superstition and every sort of bad government, yet 
bear some faint resemblance to the colonies of America, and are 
partly inhabited by Portugueze who have been established there 
for several generations. The Dutch settlements at the Cape of 
Good Hope and at Batavia, are at present the most considerable 
colonies which the Europeans have established either in Africa or 
in the East Indies, and both these settlements are peculiarly 
fortunate in their situation. The Cape of Good Hope was inhabited 
by a race of people almost as barbarous and quite as incapable of 


There are 
not nu- 
merous 
and thriv- 
ing colo- 
nies in 
Africa 
and the 
East 
Indies, 
as in 
America. 


“^Raynal, Hhtoire philosophique, ijjir tom. i., p. jyS. 
Above, pp. 541, 542. “*Ed. i reads “those.’ 



The 

Dutch ex- 
clusive 
company 
destroys 
spices and 
nutmeg 
trees, 


600 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

defending themselves as the natives of America. It is besides the 
half-way house, if one may say so, between Europe and the East 
Indies, at which almost every European ship makes some stay both 
in going and returning. The supplying of those ships with every 
sort of fresh provisions, with fruit and sometimes with wine, af- 
fords alone a very extensive market for the surplus produce of the 
colonists. What the Cape of Good Hope is between Europe and 
every part of the East Indies, Batavia is between the principal 
countries of the East Indies. It lies upon the most frequented road 
from Indostan to China and Japan, and is nearly about mid-way 
upon that road. Almost all the ships too that sail between Europe 
and China touch at Batavia; and it is, over and above all this, the 
center and principal mart of what is called the country trade of the 
East Indies; not only of that part of it which is carried on by Eu- 
ropeans, but of that which is carried on by the native Indians; and 
vessels navigated by the inhabitants of China and Japan, of Ton- 
quin, Malacca, Cochin-China, and the island of Celebes, are fre- 
quently to be seen in its port. Such advantageous situations have 
enabled those two colonies to surmount all the obstacles which the 
oppressive genius of an exclusive company may have occasionally 
opposed to their growth. They have enabled Batavia to surmount 
the additional disadvantage of perhaps the most unwholesome cli- 
mate in the world. 

The English and Dutch companies, though they have established 
no considerable colonies, except the two above mentioned, have 
both made considerable conquests in the East Indies. But in the 
manner in which they both govern their new subjects, the natural 
genius of an exclusive company has shown itself most distinctly. 
In the spice islands the Dutch are said to^^^ burn all the spiceries 
which a fertile season produces beyond what they expect to dispose 
of in Europe with such a profit as they think sufficient. In the is- 
lands where they have no settlements, they give a premium to 
those who collect the young blossoms and green leaves of the clove 
and nutmeg trees which naturally grow there, but which this sav- 
age policy has now, it is said, almost completely extirpated. 
Even in the islands where they have settlements they have very 
much reduced, it is said, the number of those trees. If the produce 
even of their own islands was much greater than what suited their 
market, the natives, they suspect, might find means to convey 
some part of it to other nations; and the best way, they imagine, 

^^^Ed. I does not contain “are said to.” The statement has already been 
twice made, pp. 158, 491, 

^^®Ed. I reads “barbarous.” 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 

to secure their own monopoly, is to take care that no more shall 
grow than what they themselves carry to market. By different arts 
of oppression they have reduced the population of several of the 
Moluccas nearly to the number which is sufficient to supply with 
fresh provisions and other necessaries of life their own insignificant 
garrisons, and such of their ships as occasionally come there for a 
cargo of spices. Under the government even of the Portugueze, 
however, those islands are said to have been tolerably well inhab- 
ited. The English company have not yet had time to establish in 
Bengal so perfectly destructive a system. The plan of their gov- 
ernment, however, has had exactly the same tendency. It has not 
been uncommon, I am well assured, for the chief, that is, the first 
clerk of a factory, to order a peasant to plough up a rich field of 
poppies, and sow it with rice or some other grain. The pretence 
was, to prevent a scarcity of provisions; but the real reason, to give 
the chief an opportunity of selling at a better price a large quan- 
tity of opium, which he happened then to have upon hand. Upon 
other occasions the order has been reversed; and a rich field of 
rice or other grain has been ploughed up, in order to make room 
for a plantation of poppies; when the chief foresaw that extra- 
ordinary profit was likely to be made by opium. The servants of the 
company have upon several occasions attempted to establish in 
their own favour the monopoly of some of the most important 
branches, not only of the foreign, but of the inland trade of the 
country. Had they been allowed to go on, it is impossible that they 
should not at some time or another have attempted to restrain the 
production of the particular articles of which they had thus usurped 
the monopoly, not only to the quantity which they themselves 
could purchase, but to that which they could expect to sell with 
such a profit as they might think sufficient. In the course of a cen- 
tury or two, the policy of the English company would in this man- 
ner have probably proved as completely destructive as that of the 
Dutch. 

Nothing, however, can be more directly contrary to the real in- 
terest of those companies, considered as the sovereigns of the coun- 
tries which they have conquered, than this destructive plan. In 
almost all countries the revenue of the sovereign is drawn from 
that of the people. The greater the revenue of the people, there- 
fore, the greater the annual produce of their land and labour, the 
more they can afford to the sovereign. It is his interest, therefore, 
to increase as much as possible that annual produce. But if this is 
the interest of every sovereign, it is peculiarly so of one whose 
revenue, like that of the sovereign of Bengal, arises chiefly from a 


and has 
reduced 
the popu- 
lation of 
the Mo- 
luccas 


The Eng- 
lish com- 
pany has 
the same 
tendency 


This 

destruct- 
ive system 
is con- 
trary to 
their in- 
terest as 
sover- 
eigns, 



but they 
prefer the 
transitory 
profits of 
the mono- 
polist 
merchant 
to the 
perma- 
nent re- 
venue of 
the sover- 
eign. 


602 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

land-rent. That rent must necessarily be in proportion to the quan- 
tity and value of the produce, and both the one and the other must 
depend upon the extent of the market. The quantity will always be 
suited with more or less exactness to the consumption of those who 
can afford to pay for it, and the price which they will pay will al- 
ways be in proportion to the eagerness of their competition. It is the 
interest of such a sovereign, therefore, to open the most extensive 
market for the produce of his country, to allow the most perfect 
freedom of commerce, in order to increase as much as possible the 
number and the competition of buyers; and upon this account to 
abolish, not only all monopolies, but all restraints upon the trans- 
portation of the home produce from one part of the country to an- 
other, upon its exportation to foreign countries, or upon the impor- 
tation of goods of any kind for which it can be exchanged. He is in 
this manner most likely to increase both the quantity and value of 
that produce, and consequently of his own share of it, or of his own 
revenue. 

But a company of merchants are, it seems, incapable of consider- 
ing themselves as sovereigns, even after they have become such. 
Trade, or buying in order to sell again, they still consider as 
their principal business, and by a strange absurdity, regard the 
character of the sovereign as but an appendix to that of the mer- 
chant, as something which ought to be made subservient to it, or by 
means of which they may be enabled to buy cheaper in India, and 
thereby to sell with a better profit in Europe. They endeavour for 
this purpose to keep out as much as possible all competitors from 
the market of the countries which are subject to their government, 
and consequently to reduce, at least, some part of the surplus prod- 
uce of those countries to what is barely sufficient for supplying their 
own demand, or to what they can expect to sell in Europe with such 
a profit as they may think reasonable. Their mercantile habits draw 
them in this manner, almost necessarily, though perhaps insensibly, 
to prefer upon all ordinary occasions the little and transitory profit 
of the monopolist to the great and permanent revenue of the sover- 
eign, and would gradually lead them to treat the countries subject 
to their government nearly as the Dutch treat the Moluccas. It is 
the interest of the East India company considered as sovereigns, 
that the European goods which are carried to their Indian domin- 
ions, should be sold there as cheap as possible; and that the Indian 
goods which are brought from thence should bring there as good a 
price, or should be sold there as dear as possible. But the reverse of 
this is their interest as merchants. As sovereigns, their interest is 

“®Ed. I reads “the.” 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES ^^3 

exactly the same with that of the country which they govern. As 
merchants, their interest is directly opposite to that interest,^^'^ 

But if the genius of such a government, even as to what concerns 
its direction in Europe, is in this manner essentially and perhaps in- 
curably faulty, that of its administration in India is still more so. 
That administration is necessarily composed of a council of mer- 
chants, a profession no doubt extremely respectable, but which in 
no country in the world carries along with it that sort of authority 
which naturally over-awes the people, and without force commands 
their willing obedience. Such a council can command obedience only 
by the military force with which they are accompanied, and their 
government is therefore necessarily military and despotical. Their 
proper business, however, is that of merchants. It is to sell, upon 
their masters’ account, the European goods consigned to them, and 
to buy in return Indian goods for the European market. It is to sell 
the one as dear and to buy the other as cheap as possible, and conse- 
quently to exclude as much as possible all rivals from the particular 
market where they keep their shop. The genius of the administra- 
tion, therefore, so far as concerns the trade of the company, is the 
same as that of the direction. It tends to make government subser- 
vient to the interest of monopoly, and consequently to stunt the 
natural growth of some parts at least of the surplus produce of the 
country to what is barely suf&cient for answering the demand of 
the company. 

All the members of the administration, besides, trade more or less 
upon their own account, and it is in vain to prohibit them from do- 
ing so. Nothing can be more completely foolish than to expect that 
the clerks of a great counting-house at ten thousand miles distance, 
and consequently almost quite out of sight, should, upon a simple 
order from their masters, give up at once doing any sort of business 
upon their own account, abandon for ever all hopes of malcing a 
fortune, of which they have the means in their hands, and content 
themselves with the moderate salaries which those masters allow 
them, and which, moderate as they are, can seldom be augmented, 
being commonly as large as the real profits of the company trade 
can afford. In such circumstances, to prohibit the servants of the 
company from trading upon their own account, can have scarce any 
other effect than to enable the superior servants, under pretence of 
executing their masters order, to oppress such of the inferior ones as 
have had the misfortune to fall under their displeasure. The ser- 
vants naturally endeavour to establish the same monopoly in fa- 
vour of their own private trade as of the public trade of the com- 

Ed. I does not contain these four sentences beginning “It is the interest.” 


The ad- 
ministra- 
tion in 
India 
thinks 
only of 
buying 
cheap and 
selling 
dear, 


its mem- 
bers trade 
on their 
own ac- 
count ami 
cannot b(‘ 
prevented 
from do- 
ing so, 



and this 
private 
trade is 
more ex- 
tensive 
and 

harmful 
than the 
public 
trade of 
the com- 
pany, 


The in- 
terest of 
the ser- 
vants is 
not, like 
the real 
interest 
of the 


604 the wealth of nations 

pany. If they are suffered to act as they could wish, they will estab- 
lish this monopoly openly and directly, by fairly prohibiting all 
other people from trading in the articles in which they chuse to 
deal; and this, perhaps, is the best and least oppressive way of es- 
tablishing it. But if by an order from Europe they are prohibited 
from doing this, they will, notwithstanding, endeavour to establish 
a monopoly of the same kind, secretly and indirectly, in a way that 
is much more destructive to the country. They will employ the 
whole authority of government, and pervert the administration of 
justice, in order to harass and ruin those who interfere with them in 
any branch of commerce which, by means of agents, either con- 
cealed, or at least not publicly avowed, they may chuse to carry on. 
But the private trade of the servants will naturally extend to a 
much greater variety of articles than the public trade of the com- 
pany. The public trade of the company extends no further than 
the trade with Europe, and comprehends a part only of the foreign 
trade of the country. But the private trade of the servants may ex- 
tend to all the different branches both of its inland and foreign 
trade. The monopoly of the company can tend only to stunt the 
natural growth of that part of the surplus produce which, in the 
case of a free trade, would be exported to Europe. That of the ser- 
vants tends to stunt the natural growth of every part of the produce 
in which they chuse to deal, of what is destined for home consump- 
tion, as well as of what is destined for exportation; and consequent- 
ly to degrade the cultivation of the whole country, and to reduce 
the number of its inhabitants. It tends to reduce the quantity of 
every sort of produce, even that of the necessaries of life, whenever 
the servants of the company chuse to deal in them, to what those 
servants can both afford to buy and expect to sell with such a profit 
as pleases them.^^® 

From the nature of their situation too the servants must be more 
disposed to support with rigorous severity their own interest 
against that of the country which they govern, than their masters 
can be to support theirs. The country belongs to their masters, who 
cannot avoid having some regard for the interest of what belongs 
to them. But it does not belong to the servants. The real interest of 

Smith had in his library (see Bonar’s Catalogue, p. 15) William Bolts, 
Considerations on India Affdrs, particularly respecting the present Uate of 
Bengal and its Dependencies, ed. 1772. Pt, i., ch. xiv,, of this is “On the general 
modern trade of the English in Bengal; on the oppressions and monopolies 
which have been the causes of the decline of trade, the decrease of the rev- 
enues, and the present ruinous condition of affairs in Bengal.” At p. 215 we find 
“the servants of the Company . . . directly or indirectly monopolise what- 
ever branches they please of the internal trade of those countries,” 



AMERICA AND EAST INDIES 

their masters, if they were capable of understanding it, is the same company, 
with that of the country, and it is from ignorance chiefly, and 
the meanness of mercantile prejudice, that they ever oppress it. But of the 

the real interest of the servants is by no means the same with that county, 

of the country, and the most perfect information would not neces- 
sarily put an end to their oppressions. The regulations accordingly 
which have been sent out from Europe, though they have been fre- 
quently weak, have upon most occasions been well-meaning.^^^ 

More intelligence and perhaps less good-meaning has sometimes 
appeared in those established by the servants in India. It is a very 
singular government in which every member of the administration 
wishes to get out of the country, and consequently to have done 
with the government, as soon as he can, and to whose interest, the 
day after he has left it and carried his whole fortune with him, it is 
perfectly indifferent though the whole country was swallowed 
up by an earthquake. 

I mean not, however, by any thing which I have here said, to The evils 
throw any odious imputation upon the general character of the ser- 
vants of the East India company, and much less upon that of any system, 
particular persons. It is the system of government, the situation in 

The interest of every proprietor of India Stock, however, is by no means 
the same with that of the country in the government of which his vole gives 
him some influence. See Book V. Chap. i. Pait 3d. This note appears first in 
ed. 3 ; ed. 2 has the following note: “This would be exactly true if those mas- 
ters never had any other interest but that which belongs to them as Pro- 
prietors of India stock. But they frequently have another of much greater 
importance. Frequently a man of great, sometimes even a man of moderate 
lortune, is willing to give thirteen or fourteen hundred pounds (the present 
price of a thousand pounds share in India stock) merely for the influence 
which he expects to acquire by a vote in the Court of Proprietors. It gives 
him a share, though not in the plunder, yet in the appointment of the plun- 
derers of India; the Directors, though they make those appointments, being 
necessarily more or less under the influence of the Court of Proprietors, which 
not only elects them, but sometimes over-rules their appointments A man of 
great or even a man of moderate fortune, provided he can enfoy this influence 
for a few years, and thereby get a certain number of his friends appointed to 
employments in India, frequently cares little about the dividend which he 
can expect from so small a capital, or even about the improvement or loss of 
the capital itself upon which his vote is founded. About the prosperity or 
ruin of the great empire, in the government of which that vote gives him a 
share, he seldom cures at all. No other sovereigns ever were, or from the na- 
ture of things ever could be, so perfectly indifferent about the happiness or 
misery of their subjects, the improvement or waste of their dominions, the 
glory or disgrace of their administration, as, from irresistible moral causes, 
the greater part of the Proprietors of such a mercantile Company are, and 
necessarily must be.’' This matter with some slight alterations reappears in 
the portion of hi v , chap, i., part iii , art. ist, which was added in ed 3 b{ - 
low, p 7)0 

Ed. I reads “ignorance only.” 

Ed. j reads “have commonly been well meaning.” 

'"Ed. T reads “if.” 



the char- 
acter of 
the men 
who ad- 
minister 
it. 


Exclusive 
com- 
panies are 
nuisances. 


606 the wealth of nations 

which they are placed, that I mean to censure; not the charac- 
ter of those who have acted in it. They acted as their situation nat- 
urally directed, and they who have clamoured the loudest against 
them would, probably, not have acted better themselves. In war 
and negociation, the councils of Madras and Calcutta have upon 
several occasions conducted themselves with a resolution and de- 
cisive wisdom which would have done honour to the senate of 
Rome in the best days of that republic. The members of those 
councils, however, had been bred to professions very different from 
war and politics. But their situation alone, without education, ex- 
perience, or even example, seems to have formed in them all at once 
the great qualities which it required, and to have inspired them 
both with abilities and virtues which they themselves could not 
well know that they possessed. If upon some occasions, therefore, it 
has animated them to actions of magnanimity which could not well 
have been expected from them, we should not wonder if upon 
others it has prompted them to exploits of somewhat a different 
nature. 

Such exclusive companies, therefore, are nuisances in every re- 
spect; always more or less inconvenient to the countries in which 
they are established, and destructive to those which have the mis- 
fortune to fall under their government. 

^Eds. I and 2 read “were.” 





CHAPTER VIII 


CONCLUSION OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM ^ 

Though the encouragement of exportation, and the discourage- 
ment of importation, are the two great engines by which the mer- 
cantile system proposes to enrich every country, yet with regard to 
some particular commodities, it seems to follow an opposite plan: 
to discourage exportation and to encourage importation. Its ulti- 
mate object, however, it pretends, is always the same, to enrich the 
country by an advantageous balance of trade. It discourages the 
exportation of the materials of manufacture, and of the instruments 
of trade, in order to give our own workmen an advantage, and to 
enable them to undersell those of other nations in all foreign mar- 
kets: and by restraining, in this manner, the exportation of a few 
commodities, of no great price, it proposes to occasion a much 
greater and more valuable exportation of others. It encourages the 
importation of the materials of manufacture, in order that our own 
people may be enabled to work them up more cheaply, and thereby 
prevent a greater and more valuable importation of the manufac- 
tured commodities. I do not observe, at least in our Statute Book, 
any encouragement given to the importation of the instruments of 
trade. When manufactures have advanced to a certain pitch of 
greatness, the fabrication of the instruments of trade becomes itself 
the object of a great number of very important manufactures. To 
give any particular encouragement to the importation of such in- 
struments, would interfere too much with the interest of those man- 
ufactures. Such importation, therefore, instead of being encour- 
aged, has frequently been prohibited. Thus the importation of wool 
cards, except from Ireland, or when brought in as wreck or prize 
goods, was prohibited by the 3d of Edward IV.; - which prohibi- 
tion was renewed by the 39th of Elizabeth,'"* and has been contin- 
ued and rendered perpetual by subsequent laws.'^ 

The importation of the materials of manufacture has sometimes 

^This chapter appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed. 3. 

^ C 4 “ C 14 ^3 Car. I., c. 4; 13 and 14 Car. 11 , c. 19. 


The mer- 
cantile 
system 
discoui- 
ages the 
exportar 
tion of 
materials 
of manu- 
facture 
and in- 
struments 
of trade. 


It encour- 
ages the 
importa- 
tion ol 
materials 
though 
not of in- 
struments 
of trade. 



Various 
materials 
are ex- 
empt 
from 
customs 
duties. 


Yarn, 
though a 
manufac- 
tured 
article is 
free from 
duty, 


608 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

been encouraged by an exemption from the duties to which other 
goods are subject, and sometimes by bounties. 

The importation of sheep’s wool from several different coun- 
tries,^ of cotton wool from dl countries,® of undressed flax,'^ of the 
greater part of d3dng drugs,® of the greater part of undressed hides 
from Ireland or the British colonies,® of seal skins from the British 
Greenland fishery,^® of pig and bar iron from the British colonies, 
as well as of several other materials of manufacture, has been en- 
couraged by an exemption from all duties, if properly entered at 
the customhouse. The private interest of our merchants and manu- 
factures may, perhaps, have extorted from the legislature these ex- 
emptions, as well as the greater part of our other commercial regu- 
lations. They are, however, perfectly just and reasonable, and if, 
consistently with the necessities of the state, they could be extend- 
ed to all the other materials of manufacture, the public would cer- 
tainly be a gainer. 

The avidity of our great manufacturers, however, has in some 
cases extended these exemptions a good deal beyond what can just- 
ly be considered as the rude materials of their work. By the 24 
Geo. 11 . chap. 46. a small duty of only one penny the pound was 
imposed upon the importation of foreign brown linen yarn, instead 
of much higher duties to which it had been subjected before, viz. of 
sixpence the pound upon sail yarn, of one shilling the pound upon 
all French and Dutch yarn, and of two pounds thirteen shillings 
and fourpence upon the hundred weight of all spruce or Muscovia 
yarn.^^ But our manufacturers were not long satisfied with this re- 
duction. By the 29th of the same king, chap. 15. the same law 
which gave a bounty upon the exportation of British and Irish 
linen of which the price did not exceed eighteen pence the yard, 
even this small duty upon the importation of brown linen yarn was 
taken away. In the different operations, however, which are nec- 
essary for the preparation of linen yarn, a good deal more indus- 
try is employed, than in the subsequent operation of preparing 
linen cloth from linen yarn. To say nothing of the industry of the 
flax-growers and flax-dressers, three or four spinners, at least, are 

°Froni Ireland, 12 Geo. II., c. 21; 26 Geo. II., c. 8. Spanish wool for cloth- 
ing and Spanish felt wool.—Saxby, British Customs, p. 263. 

Geo. IIL, c. 32, § 20. ^4 Geo. II., c. 27. 

® 8 Geo. I., c. 15, § 10 ; see below, p. 621. 

Geo. III., c. 39, § I, continued by 14 Geo. III., c. 86, § ii, and 21 Geo. 
III., c. 29, § 3. 

Geo. III., c. 31, § 10. “Above, p. 547. 

“ Smith has here inadvertently given the rates at which the articles were 
valued in the “Book of Rates,” 12 Car. II., c. 4, instead of the duties, which 
would be 20 per cent, on the rates. See below, pp. 830-831. 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM ^^9 

necessary, in order to keep one weaver in constant employment; 
and more than four-fifths of the whole quantity of labour, neces- 
sary for the preparation of linen cloth, is employed in that of linen 
yarn; but our spinners are poor people, women commonly, scat- 
tered about in all different parts of the country, without support or 
protection. It is not by the sale of their work, but by that of the 
complete work of the weavers, that our great master manufac- 
turers make their profits. As it is their interest to sell the complete 
manufacture as dear, so it is to buy the materials as cheap as possi- 
ble. By extorting from the legislature bounties upon the exporta- 
tion of their own linen, high duties upon the importation of all for- 
eign linen, and a total prohibition of the home consumption of some 
sorts of French linen,^^ they endeavour to sell their own goods as 
dear as possible. By encouraging the importation of foreign linen 
yarn, and thereby bringing it into competition with that which is 
made by our own people, they endeavour to buy the work of the 
poor spinners as cheap as possible. They are as intent to keep down 
the wages of their own weavers, as the earnings of the poor spin- 
ners, and it is by no means for the benefit of the workman, that 
they endeavour either to raise the price of the complete work, or to 
lower that of the rude materials. It is the industry which is carried 
on for the benefit of the rich and the powerful, that is principally 
encouraged by our mercantile system. That which is carried on for 
the benefit of the poor and the indigent, is too often, either neg- 
lected, or oppressed. 

Both the bounty upon the exportation of linen, and the exemp- 
tion from duty upon the importation of foreign yarn, which were 
granted only for fifteen years, but continued by two different pro- 
longations,’'-^ expire with the end of the session of parliament which 
shall immediately follow the 24th of June 1786. 

The encouragement given to the importation of the materials of 
manufacture by bounties, has been principally confined to such as 
were imported from our American plantations. 

The first bounties of this kind were those granted, about the be- 
ginning of the present century, upon the importation of naval 
stores from America.'"' Under this denomination were compre- 
hended timber fit for masts, yards, and bowsprits; hemp; tar, 
pitch, and turpentine. The bounty, however, of one pound the ton 
upon masting-timber, and that of six pounds the ton upon hemp, 
were extended to such as should be imported into England from 


because 
the spin- 
ners are 
poor, un- 
protected 
people, 
and the 
master 
weavers 
are rich 
and 

powerful. 


This ex- 
emption 
and also 
the 

bounty on 
the ex- 
portation 
of linen 
are given 
by a tem- 
porary 
law. 

Bounties 
on im- 
ported 
materials 
have been 
chiefly 


Above, p. 440. 

10 Geo. Ill, c. 38, and 19 Geo. III., c. 27. 

”3 and 4 Ann, c. 10.— Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1703. 



given to 

American 

produce, 

such as 

naval 

stores, 


colonial 

indigo, 


colonial 
hemp or 
undressed 
flax, 


6io the wealth of NATIONS 

Scotland.^® Both these bounties continued without any variation, 
at the same rate, till they were severally allowed to expire; that 
upon hemp on the ist of January 1741, and that upon masting- 
timber at the end of the session of parliament immediately follow- 
ing the 24th June 1781. 

The bounties upon the importation of tar, pitch, and turpentine 
underwent, during their continuance, several alterations. Origi- 
nally that upon tar was four pounds the ton; that upon pitch the 
same; and that upon turpentine, three pounds the ton. The bounty 
of four pounds the ton upon tar was afterwards confined to such as 
had been prepared in a particular manner; that upon other good, 
clean, and merchantable tar was reduced to two pounds four shil- 
lings the ton. The bounty upon pitch was likewise reduced to one 
pound; and that upon turpentine to one pound ten shillings the 
ton.^'^ 

The second bounty upon the importation of any of the mate- 
rials of manufacture, according to the order of time, was that grant- 
ed by the 2 1 Geo. II. chap. 30. upon the importation of indigo from 
the British plantations. When the plantation indigo was worth 
three-fourths of the price of the best French indigo, it was by this 
act entitled to a bounty of sixpence the pound. This bounty, which, 
like most others, was granted only for a limited time, was contin- 
ued by several prolongations, but was reduced to four pence the 
pound.^® It was allowed to expire with the end of the session of 
parliament which followed the 25th March 1781. 

The third bounty of this kind was that granted (much about 
the time that we were beginning sometimes to court and sometimes 
to quarrel with our American colonies) by the 4 Geo. III. chap. 26. 
upon the importation of hemp, or undressed flax, from the British 
plantations. This bounty was granted for twenty-one years, from 
the 24th June 1764, to the 24th June 1785. For the first seven 
years it was to be at the rate of eight pounds the ton, for the sec- 
ond at six pounds, and for the third at four pounds. It was not ex- 
tended to Scotland, of which the climate (although hemp is some- 
times raised there, in small quantities and of an inferior quality) 
is not very fit for that produce. Such a bounty upon the importa- 
tion of Scotch flax into England would have been too great a dis- 
couragement to the native produce of the southern part of the 
united kingdom. 

“ Masting-timber (and also tar, pitch and rosin), under 12 Ann, st i, c. 9, 
and masting-timber only under 2 Geo. II , c. 35, § 12. The encouragement of 
the growth of hemp in Scotland is mentioned in the preamble of 8 Geo. I , c. 
12, and is presumably to be read into the enacting portion. 

" 8 Geo. I., c. 12 ; 2 Geo. H , c. 35 , §§ 3, n- “3 Geo. IH., e. 25. 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM 

The fourth bounty of this kind, was that granted by the 5 Geo. 
III. chap. 45. upon the importation of wood from America. It was 
granted for nine years, from the ist January 1766, to the ist Jan- 
uary 1775. During the first three years, it was to be for every hun- 
dred and twenty good deals, at the rate of one pound; and for 
every load containing fifty cubic feet of other squared timber at 
the rate of twelve shillings. For the second three years, it was for 
deals to be at the rate of fifteen shillings, and for other squared 
timber, at the rate of eight shillings; and for the third three years, 
it was for deals, to be at the rate of ten shillings, and for other 
squared timber, at the rate of five shillings. 

The fifth bounty of this kind, was that granted by the 9 Geo. III. 
chap. 38. upon the importation of raw silk from the British plan- 
tations. It was granted for twenty-one years, from the ist January 
1770, to the ist January 1791. For the first seven years it was to be 
at the rate of twenty-five pounds for every hundred pounds value; 
for the second, at twenty pounds; and for the third at fifteen 
pounds. The management of the silk-worm, and the preparation of 
silk, requires so much hand labour; and labour is so very dear in 
America, that even this great bounty, I have been informed, was 
not likely to produce any considerable effect. 

The sixth bounty of this kind, was that granted by ii Geo. III. 
chap. so. for the importation of pipe, hogshead, and barrel staves 
and heading from the British plantations. It was granted for nine 
years, from ist January 1772, to the ist January 1781. For the 
first three years, it was for a certain quantity of each, to be at the 
rate of six pounds; for the second three years, at four pounds; and 
for the third three years, at two pounds. 

The seventh and last bounty of this kind, was that granted by 
the 19 Geo. III. chap, 37. upon the importation of hemp from Ire- 
land. It was granted in the same manner as that for the importation 
of hemp and undressed flax from America, for twenty-one years, 
from the,24th June 1779, to the 24th June 1800. This term is di- 
vided, likewise, into three periods of seven years each; and in each 
of those periods, the rate of the Irish bounty is the same with that 
of the American. It docs not, however, like the American bounty, 
extend to the importation of undressed flax. It would have been too 
great a discouragement to the cultivation of that plant in Great 
Britain. When this last bounty was granted, the British and Irish 
legislatures were not in much better humour with one another, than 
the British and American had been before. But this boon to Ireland, 


American 

wood, 


colonial 
law silk, 


colonial 

barrel 

staves, 


Irish 

hemp 


^‘‘Additions and Corrections omits “that 


-’“The third bounty 



6I2 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


These 
commodi- 
ties were 
subject to 
duties 
when 
coming 
from 
foreign 
countries. 
It was 
alleged 
that the 
interest of 
the col- 
onies and 
of the 
mother 
country 
was the 
same. 


The ex- 
portation 
of wool 
and live 
sheep is 
forbidden 
under 
heavy 
penalties, 


atone 
time mu- 
tilation 
and 
death, 


it is to be hoped, has been granted under more fortunate auspices, 
than all those to America. 

The same commodities upon which we thus gave bounties, when 
imported from America, were subjected to considerable duties when 
imported from any other country. The interest of our American col- 
onies was regarded as the same with that of the mother country. 
Their wealth was considered as our wealth. Whatever money was 
sent out to them, it was said, came all back to us by the balance of 
trade, and we could never become a farthing the poorer, by any ex- 
pence which we could lay out upon them. They were our own in 
every respect, and it was an expence laid out upon the improvement 
of our own property, and for the profitable employment of our own 
people. It is unnecessary, I apprehend, at present to say any thing 
further, in order to expose the folly of a system, which fatal experi- 
ence has now sufficiently exposed. Had our American colonies really 
been a part of Great Britain, those bounties might have been con- 
sidered as bounties upon production, and would still have been 
liable to all the objections to which such bounties are liable, but to 
no other. 

The exportation of the materials of manufacture is sometimes 
discouraged by absolute prohibitions, and sometimes by high duties. 

Our woollen manufacturers have been more successful than any 
other class of workmen, in persuading the legislature that the pros- 
perity of the nation depended upon the success and extension of 
their particular business. They have not only obtained a monopoly 
against the consumers by an absolute prohibition of importing 
woollen cloths from any foreign country; but they have likewise ob- 
tained another monopoly against the sheep farmers and growers of 
wool, by a similar prohibition of the exportation of live sheep and 
wool. The severity of many of the laws which have been enacted for 
the security of the revenue is very justly complained of, as imposing 
heavy penalties upon actions which, antecedent to the statutes that 
declared them to be crimes, had always been understood tojbe inno- 
cent. But the cruellest of our revenue laws, I will venture to affirm, 
are mild and gentle, in comparison of some of those which the 
clamour of our merchants and manufacturers has extorted from the 
legislature, for the support of their own absurd and oppressive mo- 
nopolies. Like the laws of Draco, these laws may be said to be all 
written in blood. 

By the 8th of Elizabeth, chap. 3. the exporter of sheep, lambs or 
rams, was for the first offence to forfeit all his goods for ever, to suf- 
fer a year's imprisonment, and then to have his left hand cut off in 
a market town upon a market day, to be there nailed up; and for the 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM ^^3 

second offence to be adjudged a felon, and to suffer death accord- 
ingly. To prevent the breed of our sheep from being propagated in 
foreign countries, seems to have been the object of this law. By the 
13th and 14th of Charles 11 . chap. 18. the exportation of wool was 
made felony, and the exporter subjected to the same penalties and 
forfeitures as a felon. 

For the honour of the national humanity, it is to be hoped that 
neither of these statutes were ever executed. The first of them, 
however, so far as I know, has never been directly repealed, and 
Serjeant Hawkins seems to consider it as still in force.^^ It may 
however, perhaps, be considered as virtually repealed by the 12 th 
of Charles II. chap. 32. sect. 3, which, without expressly taking 
away the penalties imposed by former statutes, imposes a new 
penalty, viz. That of twenty shillings for every sheep exported, or 
attempted to be exported, together with the forfeiture of the sheep 
and of the owner’s share of the ship. The second of them was ex- 
pressly repealed by the 7th and 8th of William III. chap. 28. sect. 
4. By which it is declared that, ^Whereas the statute of the 13th 
and 14th of King Charles II. made against the exportation of wool, 
among other things in the said act mentioned, doth enact the same 
to be deemed felony; by the severity of which penalty the prosecu- 
tion of offenders hath not been so effectually put in execution: Be 
it, therefore, enacted by the authority foresaid, that so much of the 
said act, which relates to the making the said offence felony, be 
repealed and made void.” 

The penalties, however, which are either imposed by this mild- 
er statute, or which, though imposed by former statutes, are not 
repealed by this one, are still sufficiently severe. Besides the for- 
feiture of the goods, the exporter incurs the penalty of three shill- 
ings for every pound weight of wool either exported or attempted 
to be exported, that is about four or five times the value. Any mer- 
chant or other person convicted of this offence is disabled from re- 
quiring any debt or account belonging to him from any factor or 
other person.^*'^ Let his fortune be what it will, whether he is, or is 
not able to pay those heavy penalties, the law means to ruin him 
completely. But as the morals of the great body of the people are 
not yet so corrupt as those of the contrivers of this statute, I have 
not heard that any advantage has ever been taken of this clause. 
If the person convicted of this offence is not able to pay the pen- 

^ William Hawkins, Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown, 4th ed., 1762, bk. i., 
chap. 52. 

^ So far from doing so, it expressly provides that any greater penalties al- 
ready prescribed shall remain in force. 

“ 12 Car. 11 , c. 32. 


but now 
twenty 
shillings 
for every 
sheep 
with for- 
feiture of 
the sheep 
and the 
owner’s 
share in 
the ship. 


and 

three shil- 
lings for 
every 
pound of 
wool, 
with 
other 
pains and 
penalties. 



To pre- 
vent clan- 
destine 
exporta- 
tion the 
inland 
commerce 
of wool is 
much 
hampered 
by re- 
strictions. 


especially 
in Kent 
and Sus- 
sex, 


614 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

alties within three months after judgment, he is to be transported 
for seven years, and if he returns before the expiration of that 
term, he is liable to the pains of felony, without benefit of clergy 
The owner of the ship knowing this offence forfeits all his interest 
in the ship and furniture. The master and mariners knowing this 
offence forfeit all their goods and chattels, and suffer three months 
imprisonment. By a subsequent statute the master suffers six 
months imprisonment.^^ 

In order to prevent exportation, the whole inland commerce of 
wool is laid under very burdensome and oppressive restrictions. It 
cannot be packed in any box, barrel, cask, case, chest, or any other 
package, but only in packs of leather or pack-cloth, on which must 
be marked on the outside the words wool or yarn, in large letters 
not less than three inches long, on pain of forfeiting the same and 
the package, and three shillings for every pound weight, to be paid 
by the owner or packer It cannot be loaden on any horse or cart, 
or carried by land within five miles of the coast, but between sun- 
rising and sun-setting, on pain of forfeiting the same, the horses 
and carriages.^^ The hundred next adjoining to the sea coast, out 
of or through which the wool is carried or exported, forfeits twenty 
pounds, if the wool is under the value of ten pounds; and if of 
greater value, then treble that value, together with treble costs, to 
be sued for within the year. The execution to be against any two of 
the inhabitants, whom the sessions must reimburse, by an assess- 
ment on the other inhabitants, as in the cases of robbery. And if 
any person compounds with the hundred for less than this penalty, 
he is to be imprisoned for five years; and any other person may 
prosecute. These regulations take place through the whole king- 
dom.^® 

But in the particular counties of Kent and Sussex the restrictions 
are still more troublesome. Every owner of wool within ten miles of 
the sea-coast must give an account in writing, three days after 
shearing, to the next officer of the customs, of the number of his 
fleeces, and of the places where they are lodged. And before he re- 

Geo. I, c. II, § 6. 

Presumably the reference is to 10 and ii W. III., c 10, § 18, but this ap- 
plies to the commander of a king’s ship conniving at the offence, not to the 
master of the offending vessel. 

12 Geo. IL, c. 21, 1 10. 

^ 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18, § 9, forbade removal of wool in any part of the 
country between 8 p.m. and 4 a.m. from March to September, and s p.m. 
and 7 A.M. from October to February. 7 and 8 W. Ill, c. 28, § 8, taking no 
notice of this, enacted the provision quoted in the text. The provision of 13 
and 14 Car. II., c. 18, was repealed by 20 Geo. III., c. 55, which takes no 
notice of 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28. 

All these provisions are from 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28. 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM 

moves any part of them he must give the like notice of the num- 
ber and weight of the fleeces, and of the name and abode of the 
person to whom they are sold, and of the place to which it is in- 
tended they should be carried. No person within fifteen miles of 
the sea, in the said counties, can buy any wool, before he enters 
into bond to the king, that no part of the wool which he shall so 
buy shall be sold by him to any other person within fifteen miles 
of the sea. If any wool is found carrying towards the sea-side in the 
said counties, unless it has been entered and security given as 
aforesaid, it is forfeited, and the offender also forfeits three shill- 
ings for every pound weight. If any person lays any wool, not en- 
tered as aforesaid, within fifteen miles of the sea, it must be seized 
and forfeited; and if, after such seizure, any person shall claim the 
same, he must give security to the Exchequer, that if he is cast up- 
on trial he shall pay treble costs, besides all other penalties.-^ 

When such restrictions are imposed upon the inland trade, the 
coasting trade, we may believe, cannot be left very free. Every 
owner of wool who carrieth or causeth to be carried any wool to any 
port or place on the sea-coast, in order to be from thence trans- 
ported by sea to any other place or port on the coast, must first 
cause an entry thereof to be made at the port from whence it is 
intended to be conveyed, containing the weight, marks, and num- 
ber of the packages before he brings the same within five miles of 
that port: on pain of forfeiting the same, and also the horses, carts, 
and other carriages; and also of suffering and forfeiting, as by the 
other laws in force against the exportation of wool. This law, how- 
ever, (i Will. III. chap. 32.) is so very indulgent as to declare, that 
“this shall not hinder any person from carrying his wool home from 
the place of shearing, though it be within five miles of the sea, pro- 
vided that in ten days after shearing, and before he remove the 
wool, he do under his hand certify to the next officer of the cus- 
toms, the true number of fleeces, and where it is housed; and do 
not remove the same, without certifying to such officer, under his 
hand, his intention so to do, three days before.^’ Bond must be 
given that the wool to be carried coastways is to be landed at the 
particular port for which it is entered outwards; and if any part of 
it is landed without the presence of an officer, not only the for- 
feiture of the wool is incurred as in other goods, but the usual ad- 
ditional penalty of three shillings for every pound weight is like- 
wise incurred. 

Our woollen manufacturers, in order to justify their demand of 
such extraordinary restrictions and regulations, confidently as- 

9 and 10 W. Ill, c. 40. The quotation is not verbatim. 


and so 
also is 
the coast- 
ing trade. 


The 

manufac- 



turers 
alleged 
that Eng- 
lish wool 
was su- 
perior to 
all others, 
which is 
entirely 
false. 


These 
regula- 
tions have 
depressed 
the price 
of wool, 
as was 
desired, 


but this 
has not 
much re- 
duced the 
quantity 
of wool 
grown. 


6i6 XHE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

serted, that English wool was of a peculiar quality, superior to that 
of any other country; that the wool of other countries could not, 
without some mixture of it, be wrought up into any tolerable manu- 
facture; that fine cloth could not be made without it; that Eng- 
land, therefore, if the exportation of it could be totally prevented, 
could monopolize to herself almost the whole woollen trade of the 
world; and thus, having no rivals, could sell at what price she 
pleased, and in a short time acquire the most incredible degree of 
wealth by the most advantageous balance of trade. This doctrine, 
like most other doctrines which are confidently asserted by any 
considerable number of people, was, and still continues to be, most 
implicitly believed by a much greater number; by almost all those 
who are either unacquainted with the woollen trade, or who have 
not made particular enquiries. It is, however, so perfectly false, 
that English wool is in any respect necessary for the making of 
fine cloth, that it is altogether unfit for it. Fine cloth is made alto- 
gether of Spanish wool. English wool cannot be even so mixed with 
Spanish wool as to enter into the composition without spoiling and 
degrading, in some degree, the fabric of the cloth.®^ 

It has been shown in the foregoing part of this work,®^ that the 
effect of these regulations has been to depress the price of English 
wool, not only below what it naturally would be in the present 
times, but very much below what it actually was in the time of 
Edward III, The price of Scots wool, when in consequence of the 
union it became subject to the same regulations, is said to have 
fallen about one half. It is observed by the very accurate and in- 
telligent author of the Memoirs of Wool, the Reverend Mr. John 
Smith, that the price of the best English wool in England is gen- 
erally below what wool of a very inferior quality commonly sells 
for in the market of Amsterdam.®^ Tb depress the price of this com- 
modity below what may be called its natural and proper price, was 
the avowed purpose of those regulations; and there seems to be no 
doubt of their having produced the effect that was expected from 
them. 

This reduction of price, it may perhaps be thought, by discour- 
aging the growing of wool, must have reduced very much the an- 
nual produce of that commodity, though not below what it form- 
erly was, yet below what, in the present state of things, it probably 
would have been, had it, in consequence of an open and free mar- 

“It is well known that the real very superfine cloth everywhere must be 
entirely of Spanish wool.”— Anderson, Commerce, a d. 1669. 

Above, ^pp 230, 231. 

^Chronkon Rusticnm-Commerciale; or Memoirs of Wool, etc., 1767, vol. 
ii., p 418, note. 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM 617 

ket, been allowed to rise to the natural and proper price. I am, 
however, disposed to believe, that the quantity of the annual prod- 
uce cannot have been much, though it may perhaps have been a 
little, affected by these regulations. The growing of wool is not the 
chief purpose for which the sheep farmer employs his industry and 
stock. He expects his profit, not so much from the price of the 
fleece, as from that of the carcase; and the average or ordinary 
price of the latter, must even, in many cases, make up to him what- 
ever deficiency there may be in the average or ordinary price of 
the former. It has been observed in the foregoing part of this work, 
that ^^Whatever regulations tend to sink the price, either of wool or 
of raw hides, below what it naturally would be, must, in an im- 
proved and cultivated country, have some tendency to raise the 
price of butchers meat. The price both of the great and small cattle 
which are fed on improved and cultivated land, must be sufficient 
to pay the rent which the landlord, and the profit which the farmer 
has reason to expect from improved and cultivated land. If it is not, 
they will soon cease to feed them. Whatever part of this price, 
therefore, is not paid by the wool and the hide, must be paid by the 
carcase. The less there is paid for the one, the more must be paid 
for the other. In what manner this price is to be divided upon the 
different parts of the beast, is indifferent to the landlords and farm- 
ers, provided it is all paid to them. In an improved and cultivated 
country, therefore, their interest as landlords and farmers cannot 
be much affected by such regulations, though their interest as con- 
sumers may, by the rise in the price of provisions.’’ According to 
this reasoning, therefore, this degradation in the price of wool is 
not likely, in an improved and cultivated country, to occasion any 
diminution in the annual produce of that commodity; except so 
far as, by raising the price of mutton, it may somewhat diminish 
the demand for, and consequently the production of, that particu- 
lar species of butchers meat. Its effect, however, even in this way, 
it is probable, is not very considerable. 

But though its effect upon the quantity of the annual produce nor its 
may not have been very considerable, its effect upon the quality, it 
may perhaps be thought, must necessarily have been very great. 

The degradation in the quality of English wool, if not below what 
it was in former times, yet below what it naturally would have been 
in the present state of improvement and cultivation, must have 
been, it may perhaps be supposed, very nearly in proportion to the 
degradation of price. As the quality depends upon the breed, upon 
the pasture, and upon the management and cleanliness of the 

“ Above, p 23 V 



so that 
the grow- 
ers of 
wool 

have been 
less hurt 
than 
might 
have been 
expected. 

Though 
prohibi- 
tion of 
exporta- 
tion can- 
not be 
justified, 
a duty on 
the ex- 
portation 
of wool 
might 
furnish 
revenue 
with little 
incon- 
venience. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

sheep, during the whole progress of the growth of the fleece, the at- 
tention to these circumstances, it may naturally enough be im- 
agined, can never be greater than in proportion to the recompence 
which the price of the fleece is likely to make for the labour and ex- 
pence which that attention requires. It happens, however, that the 
goodness of the fleece depends, in a great measure, upon the health, 
growth, and bulk of the animal; the same attention which is nec- 
essary for the improvement of the carcase, is, in some respects, 
sufficient for that of the fleece. Notwithstanding the degradation of 
price, English wool is said to have been improved considerably dur- 
ing the course even of the present century. The improvement might 
perhaps have been greater if the price had been better; but the 
lowness of price, though it may have obstructed, yet certainly it 
has not altogether prevented that improvement. 

The violence of these regulations, therefore, seems to have af- 
fected neither the quantity nor the quality of the annual produce of 
wool so much as it might have been expected to do (though I think 
it probable that it may have affected the latter a good deal more 
than the former) ; and the interest of the growers of wool, though 
it must have been hurt in some degree, seems, upon the whole, to 
have been much less hurt than could well have been imagined. 

These considerations, however, will not justify the absolute pro- 
hibition of the exportation of wool.®^ But they will fully justify the 
imposition of a considerable tax upon that exportation. 

To hurt in any degree the interest of any one order of citizens, 
for no other purpose but to promote that of some other, is evi- 
dently contrary to that justice and equality of treatment which the 
sovereign owes to all the different orders of his subjects. But the 
prohibition certainly hurts, in some degree, the interest of the 
growers of wool, for no other purpose but to promote that of the 
manufacturers. 

Every different order of citizens is bound to contribute to the 
support of the sovereign or commonwealth. A tax of five, or even of 
ten shillings upon the exportation of every tod of wool, would pro- 
duce a very considerable revenue to the sovereign. It would hurt 
the interest of the growers somewhat less than the prohibition, be- 
cause it would not probably lower the price of wool quite so much. 
It would afford a sufficient advantage to the manufacturer, be- 
cause, though he might not buy his wool altogether so cheap as 
under the prohibition, he would still buy it, at least, five or ten 
shillings cheaper than any foreign manufacturer could buy it, be- 
sides saving the freight and insurance, which the other would be 

“ Additions and Corrections reads “the wool.” 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM ^^9 

obliged to pay. It is scarce possible to devise a tax which could pro- 
duce any considerable revenue to the sovereign, and at the same 
time occasion so little inconveniency to any body. 

The prohibition, notwithstanding all the penalties which guard 
it, does not prevent the exportation of wool. It is exported, it is 
well known, in great quantities. The great difference between the 
price in the home and that in the foreign market, presents such a 
temptation to smuggling, that all the rigour of the law cannot pre- 
vent it. This illegal exportation is advantageous to nobody but the 
smuggler. A legal exportation subject to a tax, by affording a rev- 
enue to the sovereign, and thereby saving the imposition of some 
other, perhaps, more burdensome and inconvenient taxes, might 
prove advantageous to all the different subjects of the state. 

The exportation of fuller’s earth, or fuller’s clay, supposed to be 
necessary for preparing and cleansing the woollen manufactures, 
has been subjected to nearly the same penalties as the exportation 
of wool.’^^' Even tobacco-pipe clay, though acknowledged to be dif- 
ferent from fuller’s clay, yet, on account of their resemblance, and 
because fuller’s clay might sometimes be exported as tobacco-pipe 
clay, has been laid under the same prohibitions and penalties.®' 

By the 13th and 14th of Charles II. chap. 7. the exportation, not 
only of raw hides, but of tanned leather, except in the shape of 
boots, shoes, or slippers, was prohibited; and the law gave a 
monopoly to our boot-makers and shoe-makers, not only against 
our graziers, but against our tanners. By subsequent statutes, our 
tanners have got themselves exempted from this monopoly, upon 
paying a small tax of only one shilling on the hundred weight of 
tanned leather, weighing one hundred and twelve pounds.®^ They 
have obtained likewise the drawback of two-thirds of the excise 
duties imposed upon their commodity, even when exported without 
further manufacture. All manufactures of leather may be exported 
duty free; and the exporter is besides entitled to the drawback of 

*“12 Car. IL, €.32; 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18. 

13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18, § 8. The preamble to the clause alleges that 
“great quantities of fuller’s earth or fulling clay are daily carried and exported 
under the colour of tobacco-pipe clay.” 

^ The preamble says that “nowithstanding the many good laws before this 
time made and still in force, prohibiting the exportation of leather ... by 
the cunning and subtlety of some persons and the neglect of others to take 
care thereof; there are such quantities of leather daily exported to foreign 
parts that the price of leather is grown to those excessive rates that many 
artificers working leather cannot furnish themselves with sufficient store 
thereof for the carrying on of their trades, and the poor sort of people are 
not able to buy those things made of leather which of necessity they must 
make use of.” 

20 Car. IL, c. s ; 9 Ann., c. 6, § 4, 


The ex- 
portation 
of fuller’s 
earth has 
been sub- 
jected to 
the same 
penalties 
as the ex- 
portation 
of wool. 

The ex- 
portation 
of raw 
hides 
is forbid- 
den, 



horns, 


woollen 
yarn and 
worsted, 
white 
cloths, 
watch 
cases, etc., 
also 


some 

metals. 


620 the wealth of nations 

the whole duties of excise.^^ Our graziers still continue subject to 
the old monopoly. Graziers separated from one another, and dis- 
persed through all the different corners of the country, cannot, 
without great difficulty, combine together for the purpose either of 
imposing monopolies upon their fellow-citizens, or of exempting 
themselves from such as may have been imposed upon them by 
other people.*^^ Manufacturers of all kinds, collected together in 
numerous bodies in all great cities, easily can. Even the horns of 
cattle are prohibited to be exported; and the two insignificant 
trades of the horner and comb-maker enjoy, in this respect, a 
monopoly against the graziers. 

Restraints, either by prohibitions or by taxes, upon the exporta- 
tion of goods which are partially, but not completely manufac- 
tured, are not peculiar to the manufacture of leather. As long as 
any thing remains to be done, in order to fit any commodity for 
immediate use and consumption, our manufacturers think that they 
themselves ought to have the doing of it. Woollen yarn and worsted 
are prohibited to be exported under the same penalties as wool.'^'^ 
Even white cloths are subject to a duty upon exportation, and 
our dyers have so far obtained a monopoly against our clothiers. 
Our clothiers would probably have been able to defend themselves 
against it, but it happens that the greater part of our principal 
clothiers are themselves likewise dyers. Watch-cases, clock-cases, 
and dial-plates for clocks and watches, have been prohibited to be 
exported.^® Our clock-makers and watch-makers are, it seems, un- 
willing that the price of this sort of workmanship should be raised 
upon them by the competition of foreigners. 

By some old statutes of Edward III., Henry VIII., and Edward 
VI., the exportation of all metals was prohibited. Lead and tin 
were alone excepted; probably on account of the great abundance 
of those metals; in the exportation of which, a considerable part of 
the trade of the kingdom in those days consisted. For the encour- 
agement of the mining trade, the sth of William and Mary, chap. 
17. exempted from this prohibition, iron, copper, and mundic 
metal made from British ore. The exportation of all sorts of cop- 

"9 Ann., c. II, § 39, explained by 10 Ann., c. 26, § 6, and 12 Ann., st. 2, 
c. 9, § 64. Above, p. 126. 

Except under certain conditions by 4 Ed. IV., c. 8; wholly by 7 Jac. I., 
c. 14, § 4. 

Under 13 and 14 Car. II., c. 18, and 7 and 8 W. III., c. 28 ; above, pp. 612, 
613. 

^*(See below, next page. 

9 and 10 W. III., c. 28, professedly to prevent frauds. 

“The preamble to the Act next quoted in the text mentions 28 Ed. III., 
c. 5 (iron) ; 33 Hen. VIII., c. 7 (brass, copper, etc.), and 2 and 3 Ed. VI., c. 
37 (bell-metal, etc.). 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM 621 

pc:r bars, foreign as well as British, was afterwards permitted by the 
9th and loth of William III. chap. 26.*^'^ The exportation of un- 
manufactured brass, of what is called gun-metal, bell-metal, and 
shroff-metal, still continues to be prohibited. Brass manufactures 
of all sorts may be exported duty free.^^ 

The exportation of the materials of manufacture, where it is not 
altogether prohibited, is in many cases subjected to considerable 
duties. 

By the 8th George I. chap. 15., the exportation of all goods, the 
produce or manufacture of Great Britain, upon which any duties 
had been imposed by former statutes, was rendered duty free. The 
following goods, however, were excepted: Alum, lead, lead ore, tin, 
tanned leather, copperas, coals, wool cards, white woollen cloths, 
lapis calaminaris, skins of all sorts, glue, coney hair or wool, hare’s 
wool, hair of all sorts, horses, and litharge of lead. If you except 
horses, all these are either materials of manufacture, or incomplete 
manufactures (which may be considered as materials for still fur- 
ther manufacture), or instruments of trade. This statute leaves 
them subject to all the old duties which had ever been imposed 
upon them, the old subsidy and one per cent, outwards.^^ 

By the same statute a great number of foreign drugs for dyers’ 
use, are exempted from all duties upon importation. Each of them, 
however, is afterwards subjected to a certain duty, not indeed a 
very heavy one, upon exportation.®^ Our dyers, it sisems, while they 
thought it for their interest to encourage the importation of those 
drugs, by an exemption from all duties, thought it likewise for their 
interest to throw some small discouragement upon their exporta- 
tion. The avidity however, which suggested this notable piece of 
mercantile ingenuity, most probably disappointed itself of its ob- 
ject, It necessarily taught the importers to be more careful than 
they might otherwise have been, that their importation should not 
exceed what was necessary for the supply of the home market. The 
home market was at all times likely to be more scantily supplied; 
the commodities were at all times likely to be somewhat dearer 
there than they would have been, had the exportation been render- 
ed as free as the importation. 

This Act is not printed in the ordinary collections, but the provision re- 
ferred to is in Pickering’s index, s.v. Copper, and the clause is recited in a 
renewing Act, 12 Ann., st. i, c. 18. 

Under the general Act, 8 Geo. L, c. 15, mentioned immediately below. 

^ 12 Car. II., c. 4, § 2, and 14 Car. II., c. ii, § 35. The 1 per cent was due 
on goods exported to ports in the Mediterranean beyond Malaga, unless the 
ship had sixteen guns and other warlike equipment. See Saxby, British Cus- 
toms, pp. 48, 51. 

Sixpence in the pound on the values at which they arc rated in the Act. 


On vari- 
ous other 
materials 
of manu- 
facture 
consider- 
able ex- 
port 

duties are 
imposed. 



622 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

Gum By the above-mentioned statute, gum senega, or gum arabic, 

being among the enumerated dying drugs, might be imported duty 
pecdiar free. They were subjected, indeed, to a small poundage duty, 
li7';tory amounting only to three pence in the hundred weight upon their re- 

subject to exportation. France enjoyed, at that time, an exclusive trade to the 

a large country most productive of those drugs, that which lies in the 

export neighbourhood of the Senegal; and the British market could not 

^ be easily supplied by the immediate importation of them from the 

place of growth. By the 25th Geo. therefore, gum senega was 
allowed to be imported (contrary to the general dispositions of the 
act of navigation), from any part of Europe. As the law, however, 
did not mean to encourage this species of trade, so contrary to the 
general principles of the mercantile policy of England, it imposed a 
duty of ten shillings the hundred weight upon such importation, 
and no part of this duty was to be afterwards drawn back upon its 
exportation. The successful war which began in 1755 gave Great 
Britain the same exclusive trade to those countries which France 
had enjoyed before.®^ Our manufacturers, as soon as the peace was 
made, endeavoured to avail themselves of this advantage, and to 
establish a monopoly in their own favour, both against the growers, 
and against the importers of this commodity. By the Sth Geo. III. 
therefore, chap. 37. the exportation of gum senega from his maj- 
esty’s dominions in Africa was confined to Great Britain, and was 
subjected to all the same restrictions, regulations, forfeitures and 
penalties, as that of the enumerated commodities of the British 
colonies in America and the West Indies. Its importation, indeed, 
was subjected to a small duty of six-pence the hundred weight, but 
its re-exportation was subjected to the enormous duty of one pound 
ten shillings the hundred weight. It was the intention of our man- 
ufacturers that the whole produce of those countries should be im- 
ported into Great Britain, and in order that they themselves might 
be enabled to buy it at their own price, that no part of it should be 
exported again, but at such an expence as would sufficiently dis 
courage that exportation. Their avidity, however, upon this, as 
well as upon many other occasions, disappointed itself of its ob- 
ject. This enormous duty presented such a temptation to smug- 
gling, that great quantities of this commodity were clandestinely 
exported, probably to all the manufacturing countries of Europe, 
but particularly to Holland, not only from Great Britain but from 
Africa. Upon this account,®^ by the 14 Geo. III. chap. 10. this duty 
upon exportation was reduced to five shillings the hundred weight. 

In the book of rates, according to which the old subsidy was lev- 
33 . Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1758. ‘’'*As is stated in the preamble. 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM 623 

ied, beaver skins were estimated at six shillings and eight-pence 
a-piece, and the different subsidies and imposts, which before the 
year 1722 had been laid upon their importation, amounted to one- 
fifth part of the rate, or to sixteen-pence upon each skin; all of 
which, except half the old subsidy, amounting only to two-pence, 
was drawn back upon exportation.®^ This duty upon the importa- 
tion of so important a material of manufacture had been thought 
too high, and, in the year 1722, the rate was reduced to two shill- 
ings and six-pence, which reduced the duty upon importation to 
six-pence, and of this only one half was to be drawn back upon ex- 
portation.®® The same successful war put the country most pro- 
ductive of beaver under the dominion of Great Britain, and beaver 
skins being among the enumerated commodities, their exportation 
from America was consequently confined to the market of Great 
Britain. Our manufacturers soon bethought themselves of the 
advantage which they might make of this circumstance, and in the 
year 1764,®® the duty upon the importation of beaver-skin was re- 
duced to one penny, but the duty upon exportation was raised to 
seven-pence each skin, without any drawback of the duty upon 
importation. By the same law, a duty of eighteen pence the pound 
was imposed upon the exportation of beaver-wool or wombs, with- 
out making any alteration in the duty upon the importation of that 
commodity, which when imported by British and in British ship- 
ping, amounted at that time to between four-pence and five-pence 
the piece. 

Coals may be considered both as a material of manufacture and 
as an instrument of trade. Heavy duties, accordingly, have been 
imposed upon their exportation, amounting at present (1783) to 
more than five shillings the ton, or to more than fifteen shillings the 
chaldron, Newcastle measure; which is in most cases more than the 
original value of the commodity at the coal pit, or even at the ship- 
ping port for exportation. 

The exportation, however, of the instruments of trade, properly 
so called, is commonly restrained, not by high duties, but by ab- 
solute prohibitions. Thus by the 7th and 8th of William III. chap. 
20. sect. 8. the exportation of frames or engines for knitting gloves 
or stockings is prohibited under the penalty, not only of the for- 
feiture of such frames or engines, so exported, or attempted to be 
exported, but of forty pounds, one half to the king, the other to the 

®‘Thc facts are given in the preamble to 8 Geo, L, c. 15, § 13. The old sub- 
sidy, the new, the one-third and the two-third subsidies account for is., and 
the additional impost for ^d. 

“ See above, p. 467. Geo. L, c. 13. The year should be 1721. 
the hatters. ®*4 Geo. III., c. 9. 


beaver 
skins ex- 
ported are 
charged 
seven 
pence. 


and coals 
five shil- 
lings a 
ton. 


The ex- 
portation 
of the in- 
struments 
of trade is 
common- 
ly pro- 
hibited. 



Similarly 
it is a 
grave of- 
fence to 
entice an 
artificer 
abroad, 


and the 
artificer 
who exer- 
cises or 
teaches 
his trade 
abroad 
maybe 
ordered to 
return. 


624 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

person who shall inform or sue for the same. In the same manner by 
the 14th Geo. III. chap. 71. the exportation to foreign parts, of any 
utensils made use of in the cotton, linen, woollen and silk manu- 
factures, is prohibited under the penalty, not only of the forfeiture 
of such utensils, but of two hundred pounds, to be paid by the per- 
son who shall offend in this manner, and likewise of two hundred 
pounds to be paid by the master of the ship who shall knowingly 
suffer such utensils to be loaded on board his ship. 

When such heavy penalties were imposed upon the exportation 
of the dead instruments of trade, it could not well be expected that 
the living instrument, the artificer, should be allowed to go free. 
Accordingly, by the 5 Geo. I. chap. 27. the person who shall be con- 
victed of enticing any artificer of, or in any of the manufactures of 
Great Britain, to go into any foreign parts, in order to practise or 
teach his trade, is liable for the first offence to be fined in any sum 
not exceeding one hundred pounds, and to three months imprison- 
ment, and until the fine shall be paid; and for the second offence, 
to be fined in any sum at the discretion of the court, and to impris- 
onment for twelve months, and until the fine shall be paid. By the 
23 Geo. II. chap. 13. this penalty is increased for the first offence 
to five hundred pounds for every artificer so enticed, and to twelve 
months imprisonment, and until the fine shall be paid; and for the 
second offence, to one thousand pounds, and to two years imprison- 
ment, and until the fine shall be paid. 

By the former of those two statutes, upon proof that any person 
has been enticing any artificer, or that any artificer has promised 
or contracted to go into foreign parts for the purposes aforesaid, 
such artificer may be obliged to give security at the discretion of 
the court, that he shall not go beyond the seas, and may be com- 
mitted to prison until he give such security. 

If any artificer has gone beyond the seas, and is exercising or 
teaching his trade in any foreign country, upon warning being given 
to him by any of his majesty’s ministers or consuls abroad, or by 
one of his majesty’s secretaries of state for the time being, if he does 
not, within six months after such warning, return into this realm, 
and from thenceforth abide and inhabit continually within the 
same, he is from thenceforth declared incapable of taking any leg- 
acy devised to him within this kingdom, or of being executor or 
administrator to any person, or of taking any lands within this 
kingdom by descent, devise, or purchase. He likewise forfeits to the 
king, all his lands, goods and chattels, is declared an alien in every 
respect, and is put out of the king’s protection.^® 

Under the same statute, 5 Geo. I, c. 27. 



CONCLUSION OF MERCANTILE SYSTEM <^25 

It is unnecessary, I imagine, to observe, how contrary such regu- 
lations are to the boasted liberty of the subject, of which we affect 
to be so very jealous; but which, in this case, is so plainly sacrificed 
to the futile interests of our merchants and manufacturers. 

The laudable motive of all these regulations, is to extend our own 
manufactures, not by their own improvement, but by the depres- 
sion of those of all our neighbours, and by putting an end, as much 
as possible, to the troublesome competition of such odious and dis- 
agreeable rivals. Our master manufacturers think it reasonable, 
that they themselves should have the monopoly of the ingenuity of 
all their countrymen. Though by restraining, in some trades, the 
number of apprentices which can be employed at one time, and by 
imposing the necessity of a long apprenticeship in all trades, they 
endeavour, all of them, to confine the knowledge of their respec- 
tive employments to as small a number as possible; they are un- 
willing, however, that any part of this small number should go 
abroad to instruct foreigners. 

Consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production; and 
the interest of the producer ought to be attended to, only so far as 
it may be necessary for promoting that of the consumer. The max- 
im is so perfectly self-evident, that it would be absurd to attempt 
to prove it. But in the mercantile system, the interest of the con- 
sumer is almost constantly sacrificed to that of the producer; and 
it seems to consider production, and not consumption, as the ulti- 
mate end and object of all industry and commerce. 

In the restraints upon the importation of all foreign commodi- 
ties which can come into competition with those of our own growth, 
or manufacture, the interest of the home-consumer is evidently sac- 
rificed to that of the producer. It is altogether for the benefit of the 
latter, that the former is obliged to pay that enhancement of price 
which this monopoly almost always occasions. 

It is altogether for the benefit of the producer that bounties are 
granted upon the exportation of some of his productions. The 
home-consumer is obliged to pay, first, the tax which is necessary 
for paying the bounty, and secondly, the still greater tax which nec- 
essarily arises from the enhancement of the price of the commodity 
in the home market. 

By the famous treaty of commerce with Portugal, the con- 
sumer is prevented by high duties from purchasing of a neighbour- 
ing country, a commodity which our own climate does not produce, 
but is obliged to purchase it of a distant country, though it is 
acknowledged, that the commodity of the distant country is of a 
""Above, p. S12. 


The ob- 
ject is to 
depress 
the manu- 
factures 
of our 
neigh- 
bours. 


The mer- 
cantile 
system 
absurdly 
considers 
produc- 
tion and 
not con- 
sumption 
to be the 
end of in- 
dustry 
and com- 
merce. 

Restraints 
on impor- 
tation of 
compet- 
ing com- 
modities 
sacrifice 
the inter- 
est of the 
consumer 
to the 
producer, 

and so do 
bounties 
on expor- 
tation 



626 


and the 
provisions 
of the 
Methuen 
treaty, 


but the 
most ex- 
travagant 
case of all 
is that of 
the man- 
agement 
of the 
American 
and West 
Indian 
colonies. 


The con- 
trivers of 
the whole 
mercan- 
tile sys- 
tem are 
the pro- 
ducers 
and 

especially 
the mer- 
chants 
and 

manufac- 

turers. 


THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

worse quality than that of the near one. The home-consumer is 
obliged to submit to this inconveniency, in order that the producer 
may import into the distant country some of his productions upon 
more advantageous terms than he would otherwise have been al- 
lowed to do. The consumer, too, is obliged to pay, whatever en- 
hancement in the price of those very productions, this forced ex- 
portation may occasion in the home market. 

But in the system of laws which has been established for the 
management of our American and West Indian colonies, the in- 
terest of the home-consumer has been sacrificed to that of the pro- 
ducer with a more extravagant profusion than in all our other com- 
mercial regulations. A great empire has been established for the 
sole purpose of raising up a nation of customers who should be 
obliged to buy from the shops of our different producers, all the 
goods with which these could supply them. For the sake of that lit- 
tle enhancement of price which this monopoly might afford our pro- 
ducers, the home-consumers have been burdened with the whole 
expence of maintaining and defending that empire. For this pur- 
pose, and for this purpose only, in the two last wars, more than two 
hundred millions have been spent, and a new debt of more than a 
hundred and seventy millions has been contracted over and above 
all that had been expended for the same purpose in former wars. 
The interest of this debt alone is not only greater than the whole 
extraordinary profit, which, it ever could be pretended, was made 
by the monopoly of the colony trade, but than the whole value of 
that trade, or than the whole value of the goods, which at an aver- 
age have been annually exported to the colonies. 

It cannot be very difficult to determine who have been the con- 
trivers of this whole mercantile system; not the consumers, we may 
believe, whose interest has been entirely neglected; but the pro- 
ducers, whose interest has been so carefully attended to; and 
among this latter class our merchants and manufacturers have been 
by far the principal architects. In the mercantile regulations, which 
have been taken notice of in this chapter, the interest of our man- 
ufacturers has been most peculiarly attended to; and the interest, 
not so much of the consumers, as that of some other sets of pro*' 
ducers, has been sacrificed to it.^'^ 

^ This chapter appears first in Additions and Corrections and ed, 3, and is 
doubtless largely due to Smith’s appointment in 1778 to the Commissioner- 
ship of Customs (Rae Life of Adam Smith, p. 320). He had in his library W. 
Sims and R. Frewin, The Rates of Merchandise, 1782 (see Bonar, Catalogue, 
p. 27), and probably had access to earlier works such as Saxby’s British Cus> 
toms, 1757, which give the duties, etc., at earlier periods as well as reference^ 
to the Acts of Parliament regulating them. 



CHAPTER IX 


OF THE AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS, OR OF THOSE SYSTEMS OF POLI- 
TICAL OECONOMY, WHICH REPRESENT THE PRODUCE OF LAND AS 
EITHER THE SOLE OR THE PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF THE REVENUE 
AND WEALTH OF EVERY COUNTRY 

The agricultural systems of political oeconomy will not require so 
long an explanation as that which I have thought it necessary to 
bestow upon the mercantile or commercial system. 

That system which represents the produce of land as the sole 
source of the revenue and wealth of every country has, so far as I 
know, never been adopted by any nation, and it at present exists 
only in the speculations of a few men of great learning and ingenu- 
ity in France.^ It would not, surely, be worth while to examine at 
great length the errors of a system which never has done, and prob- 
ably never will do any harm in any part of the world. I shall en- 
deavour to explain, however, as distinctly as I can, the great out- 
lines of this very ingenious system. 

Mr. Colbert, the famous minister of Lewis XIV. was a man of 
probity, of great industry and knowledge of detail; of great expe- 
rience and acuteness in the examination of public accounts, and of 
abilities, in short, every way fitted for introducing method and good 
order into the collection and expenditure of the public revenue. 
That minister had unfortunately embraced all the prejudices of the 
mercantile system, in its nature and essence a system of restraint 
and regulation, and such as could scarce fail - to be agreeable to a 
laborious and plodding man of business, who had been accustomed 
to regulate the different departments of public offices, and to es- 
tablish the necessary checks and controuls for confining each to its 
proper sphere. The industry and commerce of a great country he 
endeavoured to regulate upon the same model as the departments 
of a public office; and instead of allowing every man to pursue his 

^Thc ^Iconomistcs or Physiocrats. Quesnay, Mirabeau and Mercicr de la 
Riviere are mentioned below, pp. 637, 643. 

“ Ed. I places a full stop at “mercantile system” and continues “That sys- 
tem, in its nature and essence a system of restraint and regulation, could 
scarce fail.” 

627 


The agri' 
cultural 
systems 
will re- 
quire less 
lengthy 
explana- 
tion than 
the mer- 
cantile 
system. 


Colbert 
adopted 
the mer- 
cantile 
system 
and fa- 
voured 
town in- 
dustry, 



with the 
result 
that the 
French 
philoso- 
phers who 
support 
the agri- 
cultural 
system 
under- 
value 
town in- 
dustry. 

There are 
three 
classes in 
their sys- 
tem: (i) 
proprie- 


628 XHE WEALTH OF NATIOKS 

own interest his own way, upon the liberal plan of equality, liberty 
and justice, he bestowed upon certain branches of industry extraor- 
dinary privileges, while he laid others under as extraordinary re- 
straints. He was not only disposed, like other European ministers, 
to encourage more the industry of the towns than that of the coun- 
try; but, in order to support the industry of the towns, he was will- 
ing even to depress and keep down that of the country. In order to 
render provisions cheap to the inhabitants of the towns, and there- 
by to encourage manufactures and foreign commerce, he prohibited 
altogether the exportation of corn, and thus excluded the inhabi- 
tants of the country from every foreign market for by far the most 
important part of the produce of their industry. This prohibition, 
joined to the restraints imposed by the ancient provincial laws of 
France upon the transportation of corn from one province to an- 
other, and to the arbitrary and degrading taxes which are levied up- 
on the cultivators in almost all the provinces, discouraged and kept 
down the agriculture of that country very much below the state to 
which it would naturally have risen in so very fertile a soil and so 
very happy a climate. This state of discouragement and depression 
was felt more or less in every different part of the country, and 
many different inquiries were set on foot concerning the causes of 
it. One of those causes appeared to be the preference given, by the 
institutions of Mr. Colbert, to the industry of the towns above that 
of the country. 

If the rod be bent too much one way, says the proverb, in order 
to make it straight you must bend it as much the other. The French 
philosophers, who have proposed the system which represents ag- 
riculture as the sole source of the revenue and wealth of every 
country, seem to have adopted this proverbial maxim; and as in 
the plan of Mr. Colbert the industry of the towns was certainly 
over-valued in comparison with that of the country; so in their 
system it seems to be as certainly under-valued. 

The different orders of people who have ever been supposed to 
contribute in any respect towards the annual produce of the land 
and labour of the country, they divide into three classes. The first 
is the class of the proprietors of land. The second is the class of the 
cultivators, of farmers and country labourers, whom they honour 
with the peculiar appellation of the productive class. The third is 
the class of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, whom they en- 
deavour to degrade by the humiliating appellation ^ of the barren 
or unproductive class. 

“But, see below, p. 633, where the usefulness of the class is said to be 
admitted. In his exposition of physiocratic doctrine, Smith docs not appear to 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS 629 

The class of proprietors contributes to the annual produce by the 
expence which they may occasionally lay out upon the improve- 
ment of the land, upon the buildings, drains, enclosures and other 
ameliorations, which they may either make or maintain upon it, 
and by means of which the cultivators are enabled, with the same 
capital, to raise a greater produce, and consequently to pay a great- 
er rent. This advanced rent may be considered as the interest or 
profit due to the proprietor upon the expence or capital which he 
thus employs in the improvement of his land. Such expences are in 
this system called ground expences (depenses foncieres). 

The cultivators or farmers contribute to the annual produce by 
what are in this system called the original and annual expences (de- 
penses primitives et depenses annuelles) which they lay out upon 
the cultivation of the land. The original expences consist in the in- 
struments of husbandry, in the stock of cattle, in the seed, and in 
the maintenance of the farmer’s family, servants and cattle, during 
at least a great part of the first year of his occupancy, or till he can 
receive some return from the land. The annual expences consist in 
the seed, in the wear and tear^ of the instruments of husbandry, 
and in the annual maintenance of the farmer’s servants and cattle, 
and of his family too, so far as any part of them can be considered 
as servants employed in cultivation. That part of the produce of the 
land which remains to him after paying the rent, ought to be suffi- 
cient, first, to replace to him within a reasonable time, at least dur- 
ing the term of his occupancy, the whole of his original expences, 
together with the ordinary profits of stock; and, secondly, to re- 
place to him annually the whole of his annual expences, together 
likewise with the ordinary profits of stock. Those two sorts of ex- 
pences are two capitals which the farmer employs in cultivation; 
and unless they are regularly restored to him, together with a rea- 
sonable profit, he cannot carry on his employment upon a level with 
other employments; but, from a regard to his own interest, must 
desert it as soon as possible, and seek some other That part of the 
produce of the land which is thus necessary for enabling the farmer 
to continue his business, ought to be considered as a fund sacred to 
cultivation, which if the landlord violates, he necessarily reduces ” 

follow any particular book closely. His library contained Du Font’s PhysiO’ 
cratie, ou coiistitukon mturelle du gouvernement le plus amntageux au 
genre kumain, 1768 (see Bonar, Catalogue^ p. 92), and he refers lower down 
to La Riviere, Vordre naturel et essentiel des sociiUs politiques, 1767, but he 
probably relied largely on his recollection of conversations in Paris; see Rae, 
Life of Adam Smith, pp. 215-222. 

'^Ed. I reads “tear and wear.” 

® Ed. I reads “some other employment.” ® Ed. i reads “degrades.” 


tors, (2) 
cultiva- 
tors, and 
(3) arti- 
ficers, 
manufac- 
turers and 
mer- 
chants. 

Proprie- 
tors con- 
tribute to 
produc- 
tion by 
expenses 
on im- 
prove- 
ment of 
land, 

cultivat- 
ors, by 
original 
and an- 
nual ex- 
penses of 
cultiva- 
tion. 



These ex- 
penses 
should be 
free from 
all taxa- 
tion. 


All other 
expenses 
and 

orders of 
people 
are un- 
produc- 
tive, 

artificers 

and 

manufac- 
turers in 
particu- 
lar, and 
the ex- 
pense of 
employ- 
ing them: 


630 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the produce of his own land, and in a few years not only disables 
the farmer from paying this racked rent, but from paying the rea- 
sonable rent which he might otherwise have got for his land. The 
rent which properly belongs to the landlord, is no more than the 
neat produce which remains after paying in the completest manner 
all the necessary expences which must be previously laid out in or- 
der to raise the gross, or the whole produce. It is because the labour 
of the cultivators, over and above paying completely all those nec- 
essary expences, affords a neat produce of this kind, that this class 
of people are in this system peculiarly distinguished by the honour- 
able appellation of the productive class. Their original and annual 
expences are for the same reason called, in this system, productive 
expences, because, over and above replacing their own value, they 
occasion the annual reproduction of this neat produce. 

The ground expences, as they are called, or what the landlord 
lays out upon the improvement of his land, are in this system too 
honoured with the appellation of productive expences. Till the 
whole of those expences, together with the ordinary profits of stock, 
have been completely repaid to him by the advanced rent which he 
gets from his land, that advanced rent ought to be regarded as sa- 
cred and inviolable, both by the church and by the king; ought to 
be subject neither to tithe nor to taxation. If it is otherwise, by 
discouraging the improvement of land, the church discourages the 
future increase of her own tithes, and the king the future increase 
of his own taxes. As in a well-ordered stale of things, therefore, 
those ground expences, over and above reproducing in the complet- 
est manner their own value, occasion likewise after a certain time a 
reproduction of a neat produce, they are in this system considered 
as productive expences. 

The ground expences of the landlord, however, together with the 
original and the annual expences of the farmer, are the only three 
sorts of expences which in this system are considered as productive. 
All other e,xpences and all other orders of people, even those who in 
the common apprehensions of men are regarded as the most pro- 
ductive, are in this account of things represented as altogether bar- 
ren and unproductive. 

Artificers and manufacturers, in particular, whose industry, in 
the common apprehensions of men, increases so much the value of 
the rude produce of land, are in this system represented as a class 
of people altogether barren and unproductive. Their labour, it is 
said, replaces only the stock which employs them, together with its 
ordinary profits. That stock consists in the materials, tools, and 
wages, advanced to them by their employer; and is the fund des- 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^31 

tined for their employment and maintenance. Its profits are the 
fund destined for the maintenance of their employer. Their em- 
ployer, as he advances to them the stock of materials, tools and 
wages necessary for their employment, so he advances to himself 
what is necessary for his own maintenance, and this maintenance 
he generally proportions to the profit which he expects to make by 
the price of their work. Unless its price repays to him the mainte- 
nance which he advances to himself, as well as the materials, tools 
and wages which he advances to his workmen, it evidently does not 
repay to him the whole expence which he lays out upon it. The 
profits of manufacturing stock, therefore, are not, like the rent of 
land, a neat produce which remains after completely repaying the 
whole expence which must be laid out in order to obtain them. The 
stock of the farmer yields him a profit as well as that of the master 
manufacturer; and it yields a rent likewise to another person, 
which that of the master manufacturer does not. The expence, 
therefore, laid out in employing and maintaining artificers and 
manufacturers, does no more than continue, if one may say so, the 
existence of its own value, and does not produce any new value. It 
is therefore altogether a barren and unproductive expence. The ex- 
pence, on the contrary, laid out in employing farmers and country 
labourers, over and above continuing the existence of its own value, 
produces a new value, the rent of the landlord. It is therefore a pro- 
ductive expence. 

Mercantile stock is equally barren and unproductive with manu- mercan- 
facturing stock. It only continues the existence of its own value, ^ 
without producing any new value. Its profits are only the repay- 
ment of the maintenance which its employer advances to himself 
during the time that he employs it, or till he receives the returns of 
it. They are only the repayment of a part of the expence which 
must be laid out in employing it. 

The labour of artificers and manufacturers never adds any thing The la- 
to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce of the hour of 
land. It adds indeed greatly to the value of some particular parts of 
it. But the consumption which in the mean time it occasions of other manufac- 
parts, is precisely equal to the value which it adds to those parts; 
so that the value of the whole amount is not, at any one moment of nothing 
time, in the least augmented by it. The person who works the lace to the 

of a pair of fine ruffles, for example, will sometimes raise the value 
of perhaps a pennyworth of flax to thirty pounds sterling. But nualpro- 
though at first sight he appears thereby to multiply the value of a duce. 
part of the rude produce about seven thousand two hundred times, 

'^Ed. I reads ‘‘repay him.” 



Artificers, 
manufac- 
turers and 
mer- 
chants 
can aug- 
ment re- 
venue 
only by 
privation. 


632 the wealth of nations 

he in reality adds nothing to the value of the whole annual amount 
of the rude produce. The working of that lace costs him perhaps 
two years labour. The thirty pounds which he gets for it when it is 
finished, is no more than the repayment of the subsistence which 
he advances to himself during the two years that he is employed 
about it. The value which, by every day’s, month’s, or year’s la- 
bour, he adds to the flax, does no more than replace the value of 
his own consumption during that day, month, or year. At no mo- 
ment of time, therefore, does he add any thing to the value of the 
whole annual amount of the rude produce of the land: the portion 
of that produce which he is continually consuming, being always 
equal to the value which he is continually producing. The extreme 
poverty of the greater part of the persons employed in this expen- 
sive, though trifling manufacture, may satisfy us that the price of 
their work does not in ordinary cases exceed the value of their sub- 
sistence. It is otherwise with the work of farmers and country la- 
bourers. The rent of the landlord is a value, which, in ordinary 
cases, it is continually producing, over and above replacing, in the 
most complete manner, the whole consumption, the whole expence 
laid out upon the employment and maintenance both of the work- 
men and of their employer. 

Artificers, manufacturers and merchants, can augment the reve- 
nue and wealth of their society, by parsimony only; or, as it is ex- 
pressed in this system, by privation, that is, by depriving them- 
selves of a part of the funds destined for their own subsistence. 
They annually reproduce nothing but those funds. Unless, there- 
fore, they annually save some part of them, unless they annually 
deprive themselves of the enjoyment of some part of them, the rev- 
enue and wealth of their society can never be in the smallest degree 
augmented by means of their industry. Farmers and country la- 
bourers, on the contrary, may enjoy completely the whole funds 
destined for their own subsistence, and yet augment at the same 
time the revenue and wealth of their society. Over and above what 
is destined ® for their own subsistence, their industry annually af- 
fords a neat produce, of which the augmentation necessarily aug- 
ments the revenue and wealth of their society. Nations, therefore, 
which, like France or England, consist in a great measure of pro- 
prietors and cultivators, can be enriched by industry and enjoy- 
ment. Nations, on the contrary, which, like Holland and Ham- 
burgh, are composed chiefly of merchants, artificers and manufac- 
turers, can grow rich only through parsimony and privation. As 
®Ed. I reads “above the funds destined.” 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^33 

the interest of nations so differently circumstanced, is very differ- 
ent, so is likewise the common character of the people. In those of 
the former kind, liberality, frankness, and good fellowship, natur- 
ally make a part of that common character. In the latter, narrow- 
ness, meanness, and a selfish disposition, averse to all social pleas- 
ure and enjoyment. 

The unproductive class, that of merchants, artificers and manu- 
facturers, is maintained and employed altogether at the expence of 
the two other classes, of that of proprietors, and of that of cultiva- 
tors. They furnish it both with the materials of its work and^with 
the fund of its subsistence, with the corn and cattle which it con- 
sumes while it is employed about that work. The proprietors and 
' cultivators finally pay both the wages of all the workmen of the 
unproductive class, and the profits of all their employers. Those 
workmen and their employers are properly the servants of the pro- 
prietors and cultivators. They are only servants who work with- 
out doors, as menial servants work within. Both the one and the 
other, however, are equally maintained at the expence of the same 
masters. The labour of both is equally unproductive. It adds noth- 
ing to the value of the sum total of the rude produce of the land. 
Instead of increasing the value of that sum total, it is a charge and 
expence which must be paid out of it. 

The unproductive class, however, is not only useful, but greatly 
useful to the other two classes. By means of the industry of mer- 
chants, artificers and manufacturers, the proprietors and cultiva- 
tors can purchase both the foreign goods and the manufactured 
produce of their own country which they have occasion for, with 
the produce of a much smaller quantity of their own labour, than 
what they would be obliged to employ, if they were to attempt, in 
an awkward and unskilful manner, either to import the one, or to 
make the other for their own use. By means of the unproductive 
class, the cultivators are delivered from many cares which would 
otherwise distract their attention from the cultivation of land. The 
superiority of produce, which, in consequence of this undivided at- 
tention, they are enabled to raise, is fully sufficient to pay the 
whole expence which the maintenance and employment of the un- 
productive class costs either the proprietors, or themselves. The in- 
dustry of merchants, artificers and manufacturers, though in its 
own nature altogether unproductive, yet contributes in this manner 
indirectly to increase the produce of the land. It increases the pro- 
ductive powers of productive labour, by leaving it at liberty to con- 
fine itself to its proper employment, the cultivation of land; and 


The un- 
produc- 
tive class 
is main- 
tained at 
the ex- 
pense of 
the other 
two, 


but is use-, 
ful to 
them, 



and it is 
not their 
interest 
to dis- 
courage 
its indus- 
try; 


nor is it 
ever the 
interest of 
the un- 
produc- 
tive class 
to oppress 
the 

others. 


Mercan- 
tile states 
similarly 
are main- 
tained at 
the ex- 
pense of 
landed 
states, 


but are 
greatly 
useful to 
them, 


and it is 
not the 
interest of 
landed 
nations to 
discour- 
age their 
industry 


634 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the plough goes frequently the easier and the better by means of 
the labour of the man whose business is most remote from the 
plough. 

It can never be the interest of the proprietors and cultivators to 
restrain or to discourage in any respect the industry of merchants, 
artificers and manufacturers. The greater the liberty which this 
unproductive class enjoys, the greater will be the competition in 
all the different trades which compose it, and the cheaper will the 
other two classes be supplied, both with foreign goods and with the 
manufactured produce of their own country. 

It can never be the interest of the unproductive class to oppress 
the other two classes. It is the surplus produce of the land, or what 
remains after deducting the maintenance, first, of the cultivators, 
and afterwards, of the proprietors, that maintains and employs the 
unproductive class. The greater this surplus, the greater must like- 
wise be the maintenance and employment of that class.^ The estab- 
lishment of perfect justice, of perfect liberty, and of perfect equal- 
ity, is the very simple secret which most effectually secures the 
highest degree of prosperity to all the three classes. 

The merchants, artificers and manufacturers of those mercantile 
states which, like Holland and Hamburgh, consist chiefly of this 
unproductive class, are in the same manner maintained and em- 
ployed altogether at the expence of the proprietors and cultivators 
of land. The only difference is, that those proprietors and cultiva- 
tors are, the greater part of them, placed at a most inconvenient 
distance from the merchants, artificers and manufacturers whom 
they supply with the materials of their work and the fund of their 
subsistence, are the inhabitants of other countries, and the sub- 
jects of other governments. 

Such mercantile states, however, are not only useful, but greatly 
useful to the inhabitants of those other countries. They fill up, in 
some measure, a very important void, and supply the place of the 
merchants, artificers and manufacturers, whom the inhabitants of 
those countries ought to find at home, but whom, from some defect 
in their policy, they do not find at home. 

It can never be the interest of those landed nations, if I may call 
them so, to discourage or distress the industry of such mercantile 
states, by imposing high duties upon their trade, or upon the com- 
modities which they furnish. Such duties, by rendering those com- 
modities dearer, could serve only to sink the real value of the sur- 
plus produce of their own land, with which, or, what comes to the 

®Ed. I reads “the greater must likewise be its maintenance and employ- 
ment.” 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^35 

same thing, with the price of which, those commodities are pur- 
chased. Such duties could serve only to discourage the increase of 
that surplus produce, and consequently the improvement and cul- 
tivation of their own land. The most effectual expedient, on the 
contrary, for raising the value of that surplus produce, for encour- 
aging its increase, and consequently the improvement and cultiva- 
tion of their own land, would be to allow the most perfect freedom 
to the trade of all such mercantile nations. 

This perfect freedom of trade would even be the most effectual 
expedient for supplying them, in due time, with all the artificers, 
manufacturers and merchants, whom they wanted at home, and for 
filling up in the properest and most advantageous manner that very 
important void which they felt there. 

The continual increase of the surplus produce of their land, 
would, in due lime, create a greater capital than what could be em- 
ployed with the ordinary rate of profit in the improvement and 
cultivation of land; and the surplus part of it would naturally turn 
itself to the employment of artificers and manufacturers at home. 
But those artificers and manufacturers, finding at home both the 
materials of their work and tlie fund of their subsistence, might 
immediately, even with much less art and skill, be able to work as 
cheap as the like artificers and manufacturers of such mercantile 
states, who had both to bring from a great distance. Even though, 
from want of art and skill, they might not for some time be able to 
work as cheap, yet, finding a market at home, they might be able 
to sell their work there as cheap as that of the artificers and manu- 
facturers of such mercantile states, which could not be brought to 
that market but from so great a distance; and as their art and skill 
improved, they would soon be able to sell it cheaper. The artificers 
and manufacturers of such mercantile states, therefore, would im- 
mediately be rivalled in the market of those landed nations, and 
soon after undersold and justled out of it altogether. The cheapness 
of the manufactures of those landed nations, in consequence of the 
gradual improvements of art and skill, would, in due time, extend 
their sale beyond the home market, and carry them to many for- 
eign markets, from which they would be in the same manner grad- 
ually justle out many of the manufactures of such mercantile na- 
tions. 

This continual increase both of the rude and manufactured prod- 
uce of those landed nations would in due time create a greater capi- 
tal than could, with the ordinary rate of profit, be employed either 
in agriculture or in manufactures. The surplus of this capital would 
Misprinted “greater” in cd. 5- 


by high 
duties. 


Freedom 
of trade 
would in 
due time 
supply ar- 
tificers, 
etc., at 
home, 

in conse- 
quence of 
the in- 
crease of 
their 
capital, 
which 
would 
first em- 
ploy 

manufac- 

turers, 


and after- 
wards 
overflow 
into 
foreign 
trade. 



Freedom 
of trade 
therefore 
is best for 
introduc- 
ing 

manufac- 
tures and 
foreign 
trade. 


High 

duties and 
prohibi- 
tions sink 
the value 
of agri- 
cultural 
produce, 
raise mer- 
cantile 
and 

manufac- 

turing 

[profit, 


636 the wealth of nations 

naturally turn itself to foreign trade, and be employed in export- 
ing, to foreign countries, such parts of the rude and manufactured 
produce of its own country, as exceeded the demand of the home 
market. In the exportation of the produce of their own country, 
the merchants of a landed nation would have an advantage of the 
same kind over those of mercantile nations, which its artificers and 
manufacturers had over the artificers and manufacturers of such 
nations; the advantage of finding at home that cargo, and those 
stores and provisions, which the others were obliged to seek for at 
a distance. With inferior art and skill in navigation, therefore, they 
would be able to sell that cargo as cheap in foreign markets as the 
merchants of such mercantile nations; and with equal art and skill 
they would be able to sell it cheaper. They would soon, therefore, 
rival those mercantile nations in this branch of foreign trade, 
and in due time would justle them out of it altogether. 

According to this liberal and generous system, therefore, the 
most advantageous method in which a landed nation can raise up 
artificers, manufacturers and merchants of its own, is to grant the 
most perfect freedom of trade to the artificers, manufacturers and 
merchants of all other nations. It thereby raises the value of the 
surplus produce of its own land, of which the continual increase 
gradually establishes a fund, which in due time necessarily raises 
up all the artificers, manufacturers and merchants whom it has oc- 
casion for. 

When a landed nation, on the contrary, oppresses either by high 
duties or by prohibitions the trade of foreign nations, it necessarily 
hurts its own interest in two different ways. First, by raising the 
price of all foreign goods and of all sorts of manufactures, it neces- 
sarily sinks the real value of the surplus produce of its own land, 
with which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of 
which, it purchases those foreign goods and manufactures. Second- 
ly, by giving a sort of monopoly of the home market to its own 
merchants, artificers and manufacturers, it raises the rate of mer- 
cantile and manufacturing profit in proportion to that of agricul- 
tural profit, and consequently either draws from agriculture a part 
of the capital which had before been employed in it, or hinders 
from going to it a part of what would otherwise have gone to it. 
This policy, therefore, discourages agriculture in two different 
ways; first, by sinking the real value of its produce, and thereby 
lowering the rate of its profit; and, secondly, by raising the rate of 
profit in all other employments. Agriculture is rendered less ad- 
vantageous, and trade and manufactures more advantageous than 

“ Ed. I reads “of their foreign trade.” 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS 637 

they otherwise would be; and every man is tempted by his own in- 
terest to turn, as much as he can, both his capital and his industry 
from the former to the latter emplo3niients. 

Though, by this oppressive policy, a landed nation should be 
able to raise up artificers, manufacturers and merchants of its own, 
somewhat sooner than it could do by the freedom of trade; a mat- 
ter, however, which is not a little doubtful; yet it would raise them 
up, if one may say so, prematurely, and before it was perfectly ripe 
for them. By raising up too hastily one species of industry, it would 
depress another more valuable species of industry. By raising up 
too hastily a species of industry which only replaces the stock which 
employs it, together with the ordinary profit, it would depress a 
species of industry which, over and above replacing that stock with 
its profit, affords likewise a neat produce, a free rent to the landlord. 
It would depress productive labour, by encouraging too hastily that 
labour which is altogether barren and unproductive. 

In what manner, according to this system, the sum total of the 
annual produce of the land is distributed among the three classes 
above mentioned, and in what manner the labour of the unproduc- 
tive class does no more than replace the value of its own consump- 
tion, without increasing in any respect the value of that sum total, 
is represented by Mr. Quesnai, the very ingenious and profound 
author of this system, in some arithmetical formularies. The first of 
these formularies, which by way of eminence he peculiarly distin- 
guishes by the name of the (Economical Table, represents the 
manner in which he supposes this distribution takes place, in a state 
of the most perfect liberty, and therefore of the highest prosperity; 
in a state where the annual produce is such as to afford the greatest 
possible neat produce, and where each class enjoys its proper share 
of the whole annual produce. Some subsequent formularies repre- 
sent the manner, in which, he supposes, this distribution is made in 
different states of restraint and regulation; in which, either the 
class of proprietors, or the barren and unproductive class, is more 
favoured than the class of cultivators, and in which, either the one 
or the other encroaches more or less upon the share which ought 
properly to belong to this productive class. Every such encroach- 
ment, every violation of that natural distribution, which the most 
perfect liberty would establish, must, according to this system, 
necessarily degrade more or less, from one year to another, the 
value and sum total of the annual produce, and must necessarily 
occasion a gradual declension in the real wealth and revenue of the 

^®See Francois Quesnay, Tableau CEconomique, 1758, reproduced in fac- 
simile for the British Economic Association, 1894. 


and could 
only raise 
up manu- 
facturers 
and mei - 
chants 
pre- 
maturely. 


The dis- 
tribution 
of the 
produce 
of land is 
represent- 
ed in the 
Economi- 
cal Table. 



Nations 
can pros- 
per in 
spite of 
hurtful 
regula- 
tions. 


The sys- 
tem is 


638 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

society; a declension of which the progress must be quicker or slow- 
er, according to the degree of this encroachment, according as that 
natural distribution, which the most perfect liberty would establish, 
is more or less violated. Those subsequent formularies represent the 
different degrees of declension, which, according to this system, cor- 
respond to the different degrees in which this natural distribution 
of things is violated. 

Some speculative physicians seem to have imagined that the 
health of the human body could be preserved only by a certain pre- 
cise regimen of diet and exercise, of which every, the smallest, 
violation necessarily occasioned some degree of disease or disorder 
proportioned to the degree of the violation. Experience, however, 
would seem to show, that the human body frequently preserves, to 
all appearance at least,^^ the most perfect state of health under a 
vast variety of different regimens; even under some which are gen- 
erally believed to be very far from being perfectly wholesome. But 
the healthful state of the human body, it would seem, contains in 
itself some unknown principle of preservation, capable either of 
preventing or of correcting, in many respects, the bad effects even 
of a very faulty regimen. Mr. Quesnai, who was himself a physi- 
cian, and a very speculative physician, seems to have entertained a 
notion of the same kind concerning the political body, and to have 
imagined that it would thrive and prosper only under a certain pre- 
cise regimen, the exact regimen of perfect liberty and perfect jus- 
tice. He seems not to have considered that in the political body, the 
natural effort which every man is continually making to better his 
own condition, is a principle of preservation capable of preventing 
and correcting, in many respects, the bad effects of a political 
(economy, in some degree both partial and oppressive. Such a po- 
litical ceconomy, though it no doubt retards more or less, is not al- 
ways capable of stopping altogether the natural progress of a na- 
tion towards wealth and prosperity, and still less of making it go 
backwards. If a nation could not prosper without the enjoyment of 
perfect liberty and perfect justice, there is not in the world a na- 
tion which could ever have prospered. In the political body, how- 
ever, the wisdom of nature has fortunately made ample provision 
for remedying many of the bad effects of the folly and injustice of 
man; in the same manner as it has done in the natural body, for 
remedying those of his sloth and intemperance. 

The capital error of this system, however, seems to lie in its 
representing the class of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, as 
Ed. I reads “at least to all appearance,” 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^39 

altogether barren and unproductive. The following observations 
may serve to show the impropriety of this representation. 

First, this class, it is acknowledged, reproduces annually the 
value of its own annual consumption, and continues, at least, the 
existence of the stock or capital which maintains and employs it. 
But upon this account alone the denomination of barren or unpro- 
ductive should seem to be very improperly applied to it. We should 
not call a marriage barren or unproductive, though it produced only 
a son and a daughter, to replace the father and mother, and though 
it did not increase the number of the human species, but only con- 
tinued it as it was before. Farmers and country labourers, indeed, 
over and above the stock which maintains and employs them, re- 
produce annually a neat produce, a free rent to the landlord. As a 
marriage which affords three children is certainly more productive 
than one which affords only two; so the labour of farmers and 
country labourers is certainly more productive than that of mer- 
chants, artificers and manufacturers. The superior produce of the 
one class, however, does not render the other barren or unpro- 
ductive. 

Secondly, it seems, upon this account, altogether improper to 
consider artificers, manufacturers and merchants, in the same light 
as menial servants. The labour of menial servants does not continue 
the existence of the fund which maintains and employs them. Their 
maintenance and employment is altogether at the expence of their 
masters, and the work which they perform is not of a nature to re- 
pay that expence. That work consists in services which perish gen- 
erally in the very instant of their performance, and does not fix or 
realize itself in any vendible commodity which can replace the value 
of their wages and maintenance. The labour, on the contrary, of 
artificers, manufacturers and merchants, naturally does fix and 
realize itself in some such vendible commodity. It is upon this ac- 
count that, in the chapter in which I treat of productive and un- 
productive labour, I have classed artificers, manufacturers and 
merchants, among the productive labourers, and menial servants 
among the barren or unproductive. 

Thirdly, it seems, upon every supposition, improper to say, that 
the labour of artificers, manufacturers and merchants, does not in- 
crease the real revenue of the society. Though we should suppose, 
for example, as it seems to be supposed in this system, that the 
value of the daily, monthly, and yearly consumption of this class 
was exactly equal to that of its daily, monthly, and yearly produc- 

^^Bk. ii., ch. iii., pp. 314-332. 


wrong in 
represent- 
ing arti- 
ficers, etc , 
as unpro- 
ductive, 
since, 

(i) they 
reproduce 
at least 
their an- 
nual con- 
sumption 
and con- 
tinue the 
capital 
which 
employs 
them, 


(2) they 
are not 
like me- 
nial ser- 
vants, 


(3) their 
labour in- 
creases 
the real 
revenue 
of the 
society, 



640 the wealth OF NATIONS 

tion ; yet it would not from thence follow that its labour added noth- 
ing to the real revenue, to the leal value of the annual produce of 
the land and labour of the society. An artificer, for example, who, 
in the first six months after harvest, executes ten pounds worth of 
work, though he should in the same time consume ten pounds worth 
of corn and other necessaries, yet really adds the value of ten 
pounds to the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. 
While he has been consuming a half yearly revenue of ten pounds 
worth of corn and other necessaries, he has produced an equal value 
of work capable of purchasing, either to himself or to some other 
person, an equal half yearly revenue. The value, therefore, of what 
has been consumed and produced during these six months is equal, 
not to ten, but to twenty pounds. It is possible, indeed, that no more 
than ten pounds worth of this value, may ever have existed at any 
one moment of time. But if the ten pounds worth of corn and other 
necessaries, which were consumed by the artificer, had been con- 
sumed by a soldier or by a menial servant, the value of that part 
of the annual produce which existed at the end of the six months, 
would have been ten pounds less than it actually is in consequence 
of the labour of the artificer. Though the value of what the arti- 
ficer produces, therefore, should not at any one moment of time be 
supposed greater than the value he consumes, yet at every moment 
of time the actually existing value of goods in the market is, in 
consequence of what he produces, greater than it otherwise would 
be. 

When the patrons of this system assert, that the consumption of 
artificers, manufacturers and merchants, is equal to the value of 
what they produce, they probably mean no more than that their 
revenue, or the fund destined for their consumption, is equal to it. 
But if they had expressed themselves more accurately, and only 
asserted, that the revenue of this class was equal to the value of 
what they produced, it might readily have occurred to the reader, 
that what would naturally be saved out of this revenue, must neces- 
sarily increase more or less the real wealth of the society. In order, 
therefore, to make out something like an argument, it was neces- 
sary that they should express themselves as they have done; and 
this argument, even supposing things actually were as it seems to 
presume them to be, turns out to be a very inconclusive one. 
u) for Fourthly, farmers and country labourers can no more augment, 
without parsimony, the real revenue, the annual produce of the 
nual pro labour of their society, than artificers, manufacturers and 

ducepar- merchants. The annual produce of the land and labour of any so- 
simonyis augmented only in two ways; either, first, by some 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^41 

improvement in the productive powers of the useful labour actually 
maintained within it; or, secondly, by some increase in the quan- 
tity of that labour. 

The improvement in the productive powers of useful labour de- 
pends, first, upon the improvement in the ability of the workman : 
and, secondly, upon that of the machinery with which he works. 
But the labour of artificers and manufacturers, as it is capable of 
being more subdivided, and the labour of each workman reduced to 
a greater simplicity of operation, than that of farmers and country 
labourers, so it is likewise capable of both these sorts of improve- 
ment in a much higher degree.^^ In this respect, therefore, the class 
of cultivators can have no sort of advantage over that of artificers 
and manufacturers. 

The increase in the quantity of useful labour actually employed 
within any society, must depend altogether upon the increase of 
the capital which employs it; and the increase of that capital again 
must be exactly equal to the amount of the savings from the reve- 
nue, either of the particular persons who manage and direct the 
employment of that capital, or of some other persons who lend it 
to them. If merchants, artificers and manufacturers are, as this 
system seems to suppose, naturally more inclined to parsimony and 
saving than proprietors and cultivators, they are, so far, more like- 
ly to augment the quantity of useful labour employed within their 
society, and consequently to increase its real revenue, the annual 
produce of its land and labour. 

Fifthly and lastly, though the revenue of the inhabitants of every 
country was supposed to consist altogether, as this system seems to 
suppose, in the quantity of subsistence which their industry could 
procure to them; yet even upon this supposition, the revenue of a 
trading and manufacturing country must, other things being equal, 
always be much greater than that of one without trade or manufac- 
tures. By means of trade and manufactures, a greater quantity of 
subsistence can be annually imported into a particular country than 
what its own lands, in the actual state of their cultivation, could 
afford. The inhabitants of a town, though they frequently possess 
no lands of their own, yet draw to themselves by their industry such 
a quantity of the rude produce of the lands of other people as sup- 
plies them, not only with the materials of their work, but with the 
fund of their subsistence. What a town always is with regard to the 
country in its neighbourhood, one independent state or country may 
frequently be with regard to other independent states or countries. 
It is thus that Holland draws a great part of its subsistence from 

“ See Book I. Chap I pp 5, 6 


just as 
much re- 
quired 
from 
farmers 
as from 
them, 


and ( 5 ) 
trade and 
manufac- 
tures can 
procure 
that sub- 
sistence 
which the 
system re- 
gards as 
the only 
revenue. 



In spite of 
its errors 
’^ne sys- 
tem has 
been 
valuable. 


642 the wealth of nations 

other countries; live cattle from Holstein and Jutland, and corn 
from almost all the different countries of Europe. A small quantity 
of manufactured produce purchases a great quantity of rude pro- 
duce. A trading and manufacturing country, therefore, naturally 
purchases with a small part of its manufactured produce a great 
part of the rude produce of other countries; while, on the contrary, 
a country without trade and manufactures is generally obliged to 
purchase, at the expence of a great part of its rude produce, a very 
small part of the manufactured produce of other countries. The 
on6 exports what can subsist and accommodate but a very few, and 
imports the subsistence and accommodation of a great number. 
The other exports the accommodation and subsistence of a great 
number, and imports that of a very few only. The inhabitants of 
the one must always enjoy a much greater quantity of subsistence 
than what their own lands, in the actual state of their cultivation, 
could afford. The inhabitants of the other must always enjoy a 
much smaller quantity. 

This system, however, with all its imperfections, is, perhaps, the 
nearest approximation to the truth that has yet been published 
upon the subject of political oeconomy, and is upon that account 
well worth the consideration of every man who wishes to examine 
with attention the principles of that very important science. Though 
in representing the labour which is employed upon land as the only 
productive labour, the notions which it inculcates are perhaps too 
narrow and confined; yet in representing the wealth of nations as 
consisting, not in the unconsumable riches of money, but in the 
consumable goods annually reproduced by the labour of the so- 
ciety; and in representing perfect liberty as the only effectual ex- 
pedient for rendering this annual reproduction the greatest possible, 
its doctrine seems to be in every respect as just as it is generous and 
liberal. Its followers are very numerous; and as men are fond of 
paradoxes, and of appearing to understand what surpasses the com- 
prehension of ordinary people, the paradox which it maintains, 
concerning the unproductive nature of manufacturing labour, has 
not perhaps contributed a little to increase the number of its ad- 
mirers. They have for some years past made a pretty considerable 
sect, distinguished in the French republic of letters by the name of. 
The (Economists. Their works have certainly been of some service 
to their country; not only by bringing into general discussion, many 
subjects which had never been well examined before, but by in- 
fluencing in some measure the public administration in favour of 
agriculture. It has been in consequence of their representations, 
accordingly, that the agriculture of France has been delivered from 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS 643 

several of the oppressions which it before laboured under. The term 
during which such a lease can be granted, as will be valid against 
every future purchaser or proprietor of the land, has been pro^ 
longed from nine to twenty-seven years.^® The ancient provincial 
restraints upon the transportation of corn from one province of the 
kingdom to another, have been entirely taken away, and the liberty 
of exporting it to all foreign countries, has been established as the 
common law of the kingdom in all ordinary cases.^'^ This sect, in 
their works, which are very numerous, and which treat not only of 
what is properly called Political (Economy, or of the nature and 
causes of the wealth of nations, but of every other branch of the 
system of civil government, all follow implicitly, and without any 
sensible variation, the doctrine of Mr. Quesnai. There is upon this 
account little variety in the greater part of their works. The most 
distinct and best connected account of this doctrine is to be found 
in a little book written by Mr. Mercier de la Riviere, sometime In- 
tendant of Martinico, intitled. The natural and essential Order of 
Political Societies.^® The admiration of this whole sect for their 
master, who was himself a man of the greatest modesty and sim- 
plicity, is not inferior to that of any of the ancient philosophers for 
the founders of their respective systems. ^'There have been, since 
the world began,’’ says a very diligent and respectable author, the 
Marquis de Mirabeau, “three great inventions which have prin- 
cipally given stability to political societies, independent of many 
other inventions which have enriched and adorned them. The first, 
is the invention of writing, which alone gives human nature the 
power of transmitting, without alteration, its laws, its contracts, its 
annals, and its discoveries. The second, is the invention of money, 
which binds together all the relations between civilized societies. 
The third, is the GEconomical Table, the result of the other two, 
which completes them both by perfecting their object; the great 
discovery of our age, but of which our posterity will reap the 
benefit.” 

“Above, p. 369. Above, pp. 198, 474. 

Uordre naturel et essentiel des societes pohtiques, 1767, a quarto of 511 
pages, seems, as G. Schelle {Du Pont de Nemours et recole physiocratiquCf 
1888, p. 46, note) remarks, not entitled to be called a “little book,” but 
Smith may have been thinking of the edition in two vols., lamo, 1767, 
nominally printed “a Londres chez Jean Nourse, libraire.” 

i 9 «Trois grandes inventions principales ont fonde stablement les societes, 
ind^pendamment de tant d’autres qui les ont ensuite dotees et d6corees. Ces 
trois sont, i® L’invention de Tecriture, qui seule donne a Thumanite le pouvoir 
de transmettre, sans alteration, ses lois, ses pactes, ses annales et ses decou- 
vertes. 2® Celle de la monnaie, qui lie tous les rapports entre les societes pol- 
icies. La troisieme enfin, qui est due a notre age, et dont nos neveux profit- 
gront, est un derive des deux autre^ et les complette egalement en perfec- 



Some na- 
tions have 
favoured 
agricul- 
ture. 


China, for 
example. 


China is 
Itself of 
very great 
extent, 
but more 
foreign 
trade 
would be 
advanta- 
geous to 
it. 


644 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

As the political ceconomy of the nations of modern Europe, has 
been more favourable to manufactures and foreign trade, the in- 
dustry of the towns, than to agriculture, the industry of the coun- 
try; so that of other nations has followed a different plan, and has 
been more favourable to agriculture than to manufactures and for- 
eign trade. 

The policy of China favours agriculture more than all other em- 
ployments. 2 ° In China, the condition of a labourer is said to be as 
much superior to that of an artificer; as in most parts of Europe, 
that of an artificer is to that of a labourer. In China, the great am- 
bition of every man is to get possession of some little bit of land, 
either in property or in lease ; and leases are there said to be granted 
upon very moderate terms, and to be sufficiently secured to the 
lessees. The Chinese have little respect for foreign trade. Your beg- 
garly commerce! was the language in which the Mandarins of Pe- 
kin used to talk to Mr. de Lange,^^ the Russian envoy, concerning 
it.22 Except with Japan, the Chinese carry on, themselves, and in 
their own bottoms, little or no foreign trade; and it is only into one 
or two ports of their kingdom that they even admit the ships of for- 
eign nations. Foreign trade, therefore, is, in China, every way con- 
fined within a much narrower circle than that to which it would 
naturally extend itself, if more freedom was allowed to it, either in 
their own ships, or in those of foreign nations. 

Manufactures, as in a small bulk they frequently contain a great 
value, and can upon that account be transported at less expence 
from one country to another than most parts of rude produce, 
are, in almost all countries, the principal support of foreign trade. 
In countries, besides, less extensive and less favourably circum- 
stanced for interior commerce than China, they generally require 
the support of foreign trade. Without an extensive foreign market, 
they could not well flourish, either in countries so moderately ex- 
tensive as to afford but a narrow home market; or in countries 

tionnant leur objet: c^est la d^couverte du Tableau economique, qui deven- 
ant desormais le truchement universel, embrasse, et accorde toutes les por- 
tions ou quotites correlatives, qui doivent entrer dans tous les calculs g6n- 
eraux de Tordre konQmqxLQ”^Philosophie Rurale ou iconomie ginirale et 
politique de V agriculture) pour servir de suite d VAmi des Hommes, Amster- 
dam, 1766, tom. L, pp. 52, S3. 

“ Du Halde, Description Giographique, etc,, de la Chine, tom. ii., p. 64. 

^ Ed. I reads “Mr. Langlet.” 

®*See the Journal of Mr. De Lange in Bell’s Travels, vol. ii. p. 258, 276 
and 293. Travels from St. Petersburg in Russia to Diverse Parts of Asia, by 
John Bell of Antermony, Glasgow, 1763. The mandarins requested the Rus- 
sians to cease “from importuning the council about their beggarly commerce,” 
p. 293. Smith was a subscriber to this book. The note is not in ed. i. 

“Ed. I reads “sorts.” 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^45 

where the communication between one province and another was so 
difficult, as to render it impossible for the goods of any particular 
place to enjoy the whole of that home market which the country 
could afford. The perfection of manufacturing industry, it must be 
remembered, depends altogether upon the division of labour; and 
the degree to which the division of labour can be introduced into 
any manufacture, is necessarily regulated, it has already been 
shown, by the extent of the market. But the great extent of the 
empire of China, the vast multitude of its inhabitants, the variety 
of climate, and consequently of productions in its different prov- 
inces, and the easy communication by means of water carriage be- 
tween the greater part of them, render the home market of that 
country of so great extent, as to be alone sufficient to support very 
great manufactures, and to admit of very considerable subdivisions 
of labour. The home market of China is, perhaps, in extent, not 
much inferior to the market of all the different countries of Europe 
put together.^® A more extensive foreign trade, however, which to 
this great home market added the foreign market of all the rest of 
the world; especially if any considerable part of this trade was car- 
ried on in Chinese ships; could scarce fail to increase very much the 
manufactures of China, and to improve very much the productive 
powers of its manufacturing industry. By a more extensive naviga- 
tion, the Chinese would naturally learn the art of using and con- 
structing themselves all the different machines made use of in 
other countries, as well as the other unorovements of art and in- 
dustry which are practised in all the different parts of the world. 
Upon their present plan they have little opportunity of improving 
themselves by the example of any other nation; except that of the 
Japanese. 

The policy of ancient Egypt too, and that of the Gentoo govern- 
ment of Indostan, seem to have favoured agriculture more than all 
other employments. 

Both in ancient Eg)rpt and^"^ Indostan, the whole body of the 
people was divided into different casts or tribes, each of which was 
confined, from father to son, to a particular employment or class of 
employments. The son of a priest was necessarily a priest; the son 
of a soldier, a soldier; the son of a labourer, a labourer; the son of 
a weaver, a weaver; the son of a taylor, a taylor; &c. In both coun- 
tries, the cast of the priests held the highest rank, and that of the 

Above, pp. 17-23. 

^Quesnay went further than this: “L’historien dit que le commerce qui 
se fit dans I’int^rieur de la Chine est si grand que celui de TEurope ne peut 
pas lui etre compare.”— Oewvrej, ed. Oncken, 1888, p. 603. 

Ed. I reads “as well as all the other.” ^ Ed. i reads “and in ” 


Egypt 
and the 
Gentoo 
govern- 
ment of 
Indostan 
favoured 
agricul- 
ture. 

The 
people 
were di- 



vided into 
castes in 
these 
countries. 

Irrigation 
was at- 
tended to 
there. 


Egypt 
and India 
were de- 
pendent 
on other 
nations 
for 

foreign 

trade 


646 the wealth of nations 

soldiers the next; and in both countries, the cast of the farmers and 
labourers was superior to the casts of merchants and manufacturers. 

The government of both countries was particularly attentive to 
the interest of agriculture. The works constructed by the ancient 
sovereigns of Eg5T)t for the proper distribution of the waters of the 
Nile were famous in antiquity; and the ruined remains of some of 
them are still the admiration of travellers. Those of the same kind 
which were constructed by the ancient sovereigns of Indostan, for 
the proper distribution of the waters of the Ganges as well as of 
many other rivers, though they have been less celebrated, seem to 
have been equally great. Both countries, accordingly, though sub- 
ject occasionally to dearths, have been famous for their great fer- 
tility. Though both were extremely populous, yet, in years of 
moderate plenty, they were both able to export great quantities of 
grain to their neighbours. 

The ancient Egyptians had a superstitious aversion to the sea; 
and as the Gentoo religion does not permit its followers to light a 
fire, nor consequently to dress any victuals upon the water, it in 
effect prohibits them from all distant sea voyages. Both the Egyp- 
tians and Indians must have depended almost altogether upon the 
navigation of other nations for the exportation of their surplus pro- 
duce; and this dependency, as it must have confined the market, so 
it must have discouraged the increase of this surplus produce. It 
must have discouraged too the increase of the manufactured pro- 
duce more than that of the rude produce. Manufactures require a 
much more extensive market than the most important parts of the 
rude produce of the land. A single shoemaker will make more than 
three hundred pairs of shoes in the year; and his own family will 
not perhaps wear out six pairs. Unless therefore he has the custom 
of at least fifty such families as his own, he cannot dispose of the 
whole produce of his own labour. The most numerous class of arti- 
ficers will seldom, in a large country, make more than one in fifty 
or one in a hundred of the whole number of families contained in it. 
But in such large countries as France and England, the number of 
people employed in agriculture has by some authors been computed 
at a half, by others at a third, and by no author that I know of, at 
less than a fifth of the whole inhabitants of the country. But as the 
produce of the agriculture of both France and England is, the far 
greater part of it, consumed at home, each person employed in it 
must, according to these computations, require little more than 
the custom of one, two, or, at most, of four such families as hL 
own, in order to dispose of the whole produce of his own labour. 

“ Ed I does not contain “of ” 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS ^47 

Agriculture, therefore, can support itself under the discouragement 
of a confined market, much better than manufactures. In both an- 
cient Egypt and Indostan, indeed, the confinement of the foreign 
market was in some measure compensated by the conveniency of 
many inland navigations, which opened, in the most advantageous 
manner, the whole extent of the home market to every part of the 
produce of every different district of those countries. The great ex- 
tent of Indostan too rendered the home market of that country 
very great, and sufficient to support a great variety of manufac- 
tures. But the small extent of ancient Egypt, which was never equal 
to England, must at all times have rendered the home market of 
that country too narrow for supporting any great variety of manu- 
factures. Bengal, accordingly, the province of Indostan which com- 
monly exports the greatest quantity of rice,* has always been more 
remarkable for the exportation of a great variety of manufactures, 
than for that of its grain. Ancient Egypt, on the contrary, though it 
exported some manufactures, fine linen in particular, as well as 
some other goods, was always most distinguished for its great ex- 
portation of grain. It was long the granary of the Roman empire. 

The sovereigns of China, of ancient Egypt, and of the different 
kingdoms into which Indostan has at different times been divided, 
have always derived the whole, or by far the most considerable part, 
of their revenue from some sort of land-tax or land-rent. This land- 
tax or land-rent, like the tithe in Europe, consisted in a certain 
proportion, a fifth, it is said, of the produce of the land, which was 
either delivered in kind, or paid in money, according to a certain 
valuation, and which therefore varied from year to year according 
to all the variations of the produce. It was natural therefore, that 
the sovereigns of those countries should be particularly attentive to 
the interests of agriculture, upon the prosperity or declension of 
which immediately depended the yearly increase or diminution of 
their own revenue.^® 

The policy of the ancient republics of Greece, and that of Rome, 
though it honoured agriculture more than manufactures or foreign 
trade, yet seems rather to have discouraged the latter employ- 
ments, than to have given any direct or intentional encouragement 
to the former. In several of the ancient states of Greece, foreign 
trade was prohibited altogether; and in several others the employ- 
ments of artificers and manufacturers were considered as hurtful 
to the strength and agility of the human body, as rendering it in- 
capable of those habits which th^ir military and gymnastic exer- 
cises endeavoured to form in it, and as thereby disqu^ifying it more 
^ Below, p. 789 


The land 
tax gave 
eastern 
sovereigns 
a parti- 
cular in- 
terest in 
agricul- 
ture 


Ancient 
Greece 
and Rome 
discour- 
aged 

manufac- 
tures and 
foreign 
trade, and 
carried on 
manufac- 
tures only 
by slave 



labour, 
which is 
expensive. 


M the wealth of nations 

or less for undergoing the fatigues and encountering the dangers 
of war. Such occupations were considered as fit only for slaves, and 
the free citizens of the state were prohibited from exercising them.^^ 
Even in those states where no such prohibition took place, as in 
Rome and Athens, the great body of the people were in effect ex- 
cluded from all the trades which are now commonly exercised by 
the lower sort of the inhabitants of towns. Such trades were, at 
Athens and Rome, all occupied by the slaves of the rich, who exer- 
cised them for the benefit of their masters, whose wealth, power, 
and protection, made it almost impossible for a poor freeman to find 
a market for his work, when it came into competition with that of 
the slaves of the rich. Slaves, however, are very seldom inventive; 
and all the most important improvements, either in machinery, or 
in the^^ arrangement -and distribution of work, which facilitate 
and abridge labour, have been the discoveries of freemen. Should a 
slave propose any improvement of this kind, his master would be 
very apt to consider the proposal as the suggestion of laziness, and 
of a desire to save his own labour at the master’s expence. The poor 
slave, instead of reward, would probably meet with much abuse, 
perhaps with some punishment. In the manufactures carried on by 
slaves, therefore, more labour must generally have been employed 
to execute the same quantity of work, than in those carried on by 
freemen. The work of the former must, upon that account, general- 
ly have been dearer than that of the latter. The Hungarian mines, 
it is remarked by Mr. Montesquieu, though not richer,^® have al- 
ways been wrought with less expence, and therefore with more 
profit, than the Turkish mines in their neighbourhood. The Turkish 
mines are wrought by slaves; and the arms of those slaves are the 
only machines which the Turks have ever thought of employing. 
The Hungarian mines are wrought by freemen, who employ a great 
deal of machinery, by which they facilitate and abridge their own 
labour.^^ From the very little that is known about the price of 
manufactures in the times of the Greeks and Romans, it would ap- 
pear that those of the finer sort were excessively dear. Silk sold for 
its weight in gold. It was not, indeed, in those times a European 
manufacture; and as it was all brought from the East Indies, the 
distance of the carriage may in some measure account for the great- 
ness of the price. The price, however, which a lady, it is said, would 
sometimes pay for a piece of very fine linen, seems to have been 
equally extravagant; and as linen was always either a European, 

“ Ed. I reads “from.” Montesquieu, Esprit des lois, liv. iv., chap. 8. 

“ Ed. I reads “that.” " Ed. i reads “more rich.” 

Lectures f p. 231; Montesquieu, Esprit des lois, liv. xv., chap. 8. 



AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS 649 

or, at farthest, an Egyptian manufacture, this high price can be 
accounted for only by the great expence of the labour which must 
have been employed about it, and the expence of this labour again 
could arise from nothing but the awkwardness of the machinery 
which it made use of. The price of fine woollens too, though not 
quite so extravagant, seems however to have been much above that 
of the present times. Some cloths, we are told by Pliny, dyed in a 
particular manner, cost a hundred denarii, or three pounds six shil- 
lings and eight pence the pound weight.®^ Others dyed in another 
manner cost a thousand denarii the pound weight, or thirty-three 
pounds six shillings and eight pence. The Roman pound, it must be 
remembered, contained only twelve of our avoirdupois ounces. This 
high price, indeed, seems to have been principally owing to the dye. 

But had not the cloths themselves been much dearer than any 
which are made in the present times, so very expensive a dye would 
not probably have been bestowed upon them. The disproportion 
would have been too great between tie value of the accessory and 
that of the principal. The price mentioned by the same author of 
some Triclinaria, a sort of woollen pillows or cushions made use of 
to lean upon as they reclined upon &eir couches at table, passes all 
credibility; some of them being said to have cost more than thirty 
thousand, others more than three hundred thousand pounds. This 
high price too is not said to have arisen from the dye. In the dress 
of the people of fashion of both sexes, there seems to have been 
much less variety, it is observed by Dr. Arbuthnot, in ancient than 
in modern times; and the very little variety which we find in 
that of the ancient statues confirms his observation. He infers from 
this, that their dress must upon the whole have been cheaper than 
ours: but the conclusion does not seem to follow. When the expence 
of fashionable dress is very great, the variety must be very small. 

But when, by the improvements in the productive powers of manu- 
facturing art and industry, the expence of any one dress comes to 
be very moderate, the variety will naturally be very great. The 
rich not being able to distinguish themselves by the expence of any 
one dress, will naturally endeavour to do so by the multitude and 
variety of their dresses. 

The greatest and most important branch of the commerce of Every- 
every nation, it has already been observed,®® is that which is car- 
ried on between the inhabitants of the town and those of the coun- raises the 

«*Plin. [R.iV'.l 1 . ix. c. 39. 

®®Plin. [B'.iV.] 1 . viii. c. 48. Neither this nor the preceding notes is in ed. i. 

John Arbuthnot, Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights and Measures, 2nd 
ed., 1754 , PP- 142-145- 

Above, p. 356. 



price of 
manufac- 
tures dis- 
courages 
agricul- 
ture, 


and this is 
done by 
systems 
which 
restrain 
manufac- 
tures and 
foreign 
trade. 


So all sys- 
tems of 
encour- 
agements 
and re- 
straints 
retard the 
progress 
of so- 
ciety. 


650 the wealth of nations 

try. The inhabitants of the town draw from the country the rude 
produce which constitutes both the materials of their work and 
the fund of their subsistence; and they pay for this rude produce 
by sending back to the country a certain portion of it manufactured 
and prepared for immediate use. The trade which is carried on be- 
tween those two different sets of people, consists ultimately in a 
certain quantity of rude produce exchanged for a certain quantity 
of manufactured produce. The dearer the latter, therefore, the 
cheaper the former; and whatever tends in any country to raise the 
price of manufactured produce, tends to lower that of the rude 
produce of the land, and thereby to discourage agriculture. The 
smaller the quantity of manufactured produce which any given 
quantity of rude produce, or, which comes to the same thing, which 
the price of any given quantity of rude produce is capable of pur- 
chasing, the smaller the exchangeable value of that given quan- 
tity of rude produce; the smaller the encouragement which either 
the landlord has to increase its quantity by improving, or the farm- 
er by cultivating the land. Whatever, besides, tends to diminish in 
any country the number of artificers and manufacturers, tends to 
diminish the home market, the most important of all markets for 
the rude produce of the land, and thereby still further to discourage 
agriculture. 

Those systems, therefore, which preferring agriculture to all 
other employments, in order to promote it, impose restraints upon 
manufactures and foreign trade, act contrary to the very end which 
they propose, and indirectly discourage that very species of indus- 
try which they mean to promote. They are so far, perhaps, more 
inconsistent than even the mercantile system. That system, by en- 
couraging manufactures and foreign trade more than agriculture, 
turns a certain portion of the capital of the society from supporting 
a more advantageous, to support a less advantageous species of in- 
dustry. But still it really and in the end encourages that species of 
industry which it means to promote. Those agricultural systems, 
on the contrary, really and in the end discourage their own favour- 
ite species of industry. 

It is thus that every system which endeavours, either, by extra- 
ordinary encouragements, to draw towards a particular species of 
industry a greater share of the capital of the society than what 
would naturally go to it; or, by extraordinary restraints, to force 
from a particular species of industry some share of the capital 
which would otherwise be employed in it; is in reality subversive of 

^ Ed. I reads “real value.” 



AGRICULTUIiAL SYSTEMS 

the great purpose which it means to promote. It retards, instead of 
accelerating, the progress of the society towards real wealth and 
greatness; and diminishes, instead of increasing, the real value of 
the annual produce of its land and labour. 

All systems either of preference or of restraint, therefore, being 
thus completely taken away, the obvious and simple system of nat- 
ural liberty establishes itself of its own accord. Every man, as long 
as he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free to 
pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his industry 
and capital into competition with those of any other man, or order 
of men. The sovereign is completely discharged from a duty, in the 
attempting to perform which he must always be exposed to innu- 
merable delusions, and for the proper performance of which no 
human wisdom or knowledge could ever be sufficient; the duty of 
superintending the industry of private people, and of directing it 
towards the employments most suitable to the interest of the so- 
ciety. According to the system of natural liberty, the sovereign has 
only three duties to attend to; three duties of great importance, in- 
deed, but plain and intelligible to common understandings: first, 
the duty of protecting the society from the violence and invasion of 
other independent societies; secondly, the duty of protecting, as far 
as possible, every member of the society from the injustice or 
oppression of every other member of it, or the duty of establishing 
an exact administration of justice; and, thirdly, the duty of erect- 
ing and maintaining certain public works and certain public insti- 
tutions, which it can never be for the interest of any individual, or 
small number of individuals, to erect and maintain; because the 
profit could never repay the expence to any individual or small 
number of individuals, though it may frequently do much more 
than repay it to a great society. 

The proper performance of those several duties of the sovereign 
necessarily supposes a certain expence; and this expence again 
necessarily requires a certain revenue to support it. In the follow- 
ing book, therefore, I shall endeavour to explain; first, what are 
the necessary expences of the sovereign or commonwealth; and 
which of those expences ought to be defrayed by the general con- 
tribution of the whole society; and which of them, by that of some 
particular part only, or of some particular members of the society: 
secondly, what are the different methods in which the whole society 
may be made to contribute towards defraying the expences incum- 
bent on the whole society, and what are the principal advantages 
and inconveniences of each of those methods: and, thirdly, what 


Thes>s- 
temof 
natural 
liberty 
leaves the 
sovereign 
only three 
duties: 

(i) the 
defence of 
the coun- 
tr>’; (2) 
the ad- 
ministra- 
tion of 
justice, 
and (3) 
the 

mainte- 
nance of 
certain 
public 
works. 


The next 
book will 
treat of 
the neces- 
sary ex- 
penses of 
the sove- 
reign, the 
methods 
of con- 
tribution 
towards 
the ex- 
penses of 
the whole 
society, 
and the 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


causes 
and ef- 
fects of 
public 
debts. 


652 

are the reasons and causes which have induced almost all modern 
governments to mortgage some part of this revenue, or to contract 
debts, and what have been the effects of those debts upon the real 
wealth, the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. 
The following book, therefore, will naturally be divided into three 
chapters. 



BOOK V 


Of the Revenue of the Sovereign or Commonwealth 


CHAPTER I 

OF THE EXPENCES OF THE SOVEREIGN OR COMMONWEALTH 

Part I 

Of the Expence of Defence 

The first duty of the sovereign, that of protecting the society from 
the violence and invasion of other independent societies, can be 
performed only by means of a military force. But the expence both 
of preparing this military force in time of peace, and of employing 
it in time of war, is very different in the different states of society, 
in the different periods .of improvement. 

Among nations of hunters, the lowest and rudest state of society, 
such as we find it among the native tribes of North America, every 
man is a warrior as well as a hunter. When he goes to war, either to 
defend his society, or to revenge the injuries which have been done 
to it by other societies, he maintains himself by his own labour, in 
the same manner as when he lives at home. His society, for in this 
state of things there is properly neither sovereign nor common- 
wealth, is at no sort of expence, either to prepare him for the field, 
or to maintain him while he is in it.^ 

Among nations of shepherds, a more advanced state of society, 
such as we find it among the Tartars and Arabs, every man is, in 
the same manner, a warrior. Such nations have commonly no fixed 
habitation, but live, either in tents, or in a sort of covered waggons 
which are easily transported from place to place. The whole tribe 
or nation changes its situation according to the different seasons of 


The ex- 
pense of a 
military 
force is 
different 
at differ- 
ent 

periods. 

Among 
hunters it 
costs 
nothing. 


When 
shepherds 
go to war 
the whole 
nation 
moves 
with its 
property 


Lectures^ p. 14. 

653 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


and the 
sovereign 
is at no 
expense 


Shepherds 
are far 
more 
formid- 
able than 
hunters 


6S4 

the year, as well as according to other accidents. When its herds and 
flocks have consumed the forage of one part of the country, it re- 
moves to another, and from that to a third. In the dry season, it 
comes down to the banks of the rivers, in the wet season it retires 
to the upper country. When such a nation goes to war, the war- 
riors will not trust their herds and flocks to the feeble defence of 
their old men, their women and children, and their old men, their 
women and children, will not be left behind without defence and 
without subsistence. The whole nation, besides, being accustomed 
to a wandering life, even in time of peace, easily takes the field in 
time of war Whether it marches as an army, or moves about as a 
company of herdsmen, the way of life is nearly the same, though 
the object proposed by it be^ very different. They all go to war 
together, therefore, and every one does as well as he can. Among 
the Tartars, even the women have been frequently known to en- 
gage in battle. If they conquer, whatever belongs to the hostile tribe 
is the recompence of the victory. But if they are vanquished, all is 
lost, and not only their herds and flocks, but their women and chil- 
dren, become the booty of the conqueror. Even the greater part of 
those who survive the action are obliged to submit to him for the 
sake of immediate subsistence. The rest are commonly dissipated 
and dispersed in the desart. 

The ordinary life, the ordinary exercises of a Tartar or Arab, 
prepare him sufficiently for war. Running, wrestling, cudgel-play- 
ing, throwing the javelin, drawing the bow, &g. are the common 
pastimes of those who live in the open air, and are all of them the 
images of war. When a Tartar or Arab actually goes to war, he is 
maintained, by his own herds and flocks which he carries with him, 
in the same manner as in peace. His chief or sovereign, for those 
nations have all chiefs or sovereigns, is at no sort of expence in 
preparing him for the field; and when he is in it, the chance of 
plunder is the only pay which he either expects or requires. 

An army of hunters can seldom exceed two or three hundred 
men. The precarious subsistence which the chace affords could sel- 
dom allow a greater number to keep together for any considerable 
time. An army of shepherds, on the contrary, may sometimes 
amount to two or three hundred thousand. As long as^nothing stops 
their progress, as long as they can go on from one district, of which 
they have consumed the forage, to another which is yet entire ; there 
seems to be scarce any limit to the number who can march on to- 
gether. A nation of hunters can never be formidable to the civ- 
ilized nations in their neighbourhood. A nation of shepherds may. 

^Ed I reads “is” 



EXPENSE OF DEFENCE ^55 

Nothing can be more contemptible than an Indian war in North 
America. Nothing, on the contrary, can be more dreadful than a 
Tartar invasion has frequently been in Asia. The judgment of 
Thucydides,^ that both Europe and Asia could not resist the 
Scythians united, has been verified by the experience of all ages. 
The inhabitants of the extensive, but defenceless plains of Scythia 
or Tartary, have been frequently united under the dominion of the 
chief of some conquering horde or clan, and the havoc and devasta- 
tion of Asia have always signalized their union. The inhabitants of 
the inhospitable deserts of Arabia, the other great nation of shep- 
herds, have never been united but once; under Mahomet and his 
immediate s uccessors.^ Their union, which was more the effect of 
religious enthusiasm than of conquest, was signalized in the same 
manner. If the hunting nations of America should ever become 
shepherds, their neighbourhood would be much more dangerous to 
^European colonies than it is at present. 

In a yet more advanced state of society, among those nations of 
husbandmen who have little foreign commerce, and no other man- 
ufactures but those coarse and houshold ones which almost every 
private family prepares for its own use, every man, in the same 
manner, either is a warrior, or easily becomes such. They who live 
by agriculture generally pass the whole day in the open air, ex- 
posed to all the inclemencies of the seasons. The hardiness of their 
ordinary life prepares them for the fatigues of war, to some of 
which their necessary occupations bear a great ^ analogy. The 
necessary occupation of a ditcher prepares him to work in the 
trenches, and to fortify a camp as well as to enclose a field. The 
ordinary pastimes of such husbandmen are the same as those of 
shepherds, and are in the same manner the images of war. But as 
husbandmen have less leisure than shepherds, they are not so fre- 
quently employed in those pastimes. They are soldiers, but soldiers 
not quite so much masters of their exercise. Such as they are, how- 
ever, it seldom costs the sovereign or commonwealth any expence 
^to prepare them for the field. 

♦ f Agriculture, even in its rudest and lowest state, supposes a set- 
^tlement; some sort of fixed habitation which cannot be abandoned 
without great loss. When a nation o f mere hu^bg^ilhnen, tbetefoye, 
g oes to war, th e wh i ^^ take the field together. Xh^ 

o ld men^ the.women^ ^^anachiM^^ at least, must remain at home to 


®What Thucydides says (ii, 97) is that no European or Asiatic nation 
could resist the Scythians if they were united Ed i reads here and on 
next page ^‘Thuadides” 

^Lectures, pp 20, 21 ®Ed i reads “a good deal of” 


Husband- 
men with 
little com- 
merce and 
only 

household 
manufac- 
tures are 
easily 
conveited 
into 
soldiers, 
and it sel- 
dom costs 
the sover- 
eign any- 
thing to 
prepare 
them for 
the field, 


01 to 

maintain 

them 

when 

they have 

taken the 

field 



Later it 
becomes 
necessary 
to pay 
those who 
take the 
field, 

since arti- 
ficers and 
manufac- 
turers 
must be 
mam- 
tainedby 
the public 
when 


656 the wealth of nations 

take care of the habitation. All the men of the military age, how- 
ever, may take the field, and, in small nations of this kind, have 
frequently done so. In every nation the men of the military age are 
supposed to amount to about a fourth or a fifth ® part of the whole 
body of the people. If the campaign too should begin after seed- 
time, and end before harvest, both the husbandman and his prin- 
cipal labourers can be spared from the farm without much loss. He 
trusts that the work which must be done in the mean time can be 
well enough executed by the old men, the women and the children. 
He is not unwilling, therefore, to serve without pay during a short 
campaign, and it frequently costs the sovereign or commonwealth 
as little to maintain him in the field as to prepare him for it. The 
citizens of all the different states of ancient Greece seem to have 
served in this manner till after the second Persian war; and the 
people of Peloponesus till after the Peloponesian war. The Pelopon- 
esians, Thucydides observes, generally left the field in the summer, 
and returned home to reap the harvest.® The Roman people under 
their kings, and during the first ages of the republic, served in the 
same manner.^ It was not till the siege of Veii, that they, who staid 
at home, began to contribute something towards maintaining those 
who went to war.^^ In the European monarchies, which were 
founded upon the ruins of the Roman empire, both before and for 
some time after the establishment of what is properly called the 
feudal law, the great lords, with all their immediate dependents, 
used to serve the crown at their own expence. In the field, in the 
same manner as at home, they maintained themselves by their own 
revenue, and not by any stipend or pay which they received from 
the king upon that particular occasion. 

In a more advanced state of society, two different causes con- 
tribute to render it altogether impossible that they, who take the 
field, should maintain themselves at their own expence. Those two 
causes are, the progress of manufactures, and the improvement in 
the art of war. 

Though a husbandman should be employed in an expedition, pro- 
vided it begins after seed-time and ends before harvest, the inter- 
ruption of his business will not always occasion any considerable 
diminution of his revenue. Without the intervention of his labour, 
nature does herself the greater part of the work which remains to 
be done. But the moment that an artificer, a smith, a carpenter, or a 
weaver, for example, quits his workhouse, the sole source of his 
revenue is completely dried up. Nature does nothing for^hinqi, he 

® Ed I reads “or fifth ” Ed i reads “so short a ” ® VII , 27 

® Livy, V., 2. ^ Livy, iv , 59 ad fin 



EXPENSE OF DEFENCE ^57 

does all for himself. When he takes the field, therefore, in defence 
of the public, as he has no revenue to maintain himself, he must 
necessarily be maintained by the public. But in a country of which 
a greater part of the inhabitants are artificers and manufacturers, a 
great part of the people who go to war must be drawn from those 
classes, and must therefore be maintained by the public as long as 
they are employed in its service. 

When the art of war too has gradually grown up to be a very in- 
tricate and complicated science, when the event of war ceases to be 
determined, as in the first ages of society, by a single irregular skir- 
mish or battle, but when the contest is generally spun out through 
several different campaigns, each of which lasts during the greater 
part of the year; it becomes universally necessary that the public 
should maintain those who serve the public in war, at least while 
they are employed in that service. Whatever in time of peace might 
be the ordinary occupation of those who go to war, so very tedious 
and expensive a service would otherwise be by far too heavy a bur- 
den upon them. After the second Persian war, accordingly, the 
armies of Athens seem to have been generally composed of mer- 
cenary troops; consisting, indeed, partly of citizens, but partly too 
of foreigners; and all of them equally hired and paid at the expence 
of the state. From the time of the siege of Veii, the armies of Rome 
received pay for their service during the time which they remained 
in the field.^^ Under the feudal governments the military service 
both of the great lords and of their immediate dependents was, 
after a certain period, universally exchanged for a payment in 
money, which was employed to maintain those who served in their 
stead. 

The number of those who can go to war, in proportion to the 
whole number of the people, is necessarily much smaller in a civ- 
ilized, than in a rude state of society. In a civilized society, as the 
soldiers are maintained altogether by the labour of those who are^ 
not soldiers, the number of the former £a|mq^ exceed what the ^ 
latter can maintain, over and above maintaining, in a manner suit- 
able to their respective stations, both themselves and the other 
officers of government, and law, whom they are obliged to main-^ 
tain, lu the little agrarian states of ancient Greece^, a fqurth or a 
fiftlUiartof the whole^body g£ the people considered themselves as 
sold iers^ would sometimes, it is said, take the field. Among the 
civilized nations of modern Europe, it is commonly computed, that 
not more than one hundredth part of the inhabitants of any coun- 

^ Above, p. 656. “ Ed. i reads “never can ” 


away 

from 

their 

work, 


and the 
greater 
length of 
cam- 
paigns 
makes 
service 
without 
pay too 
heavy a 
burden 
even for 
husband- 
men 


The pos- 
sible pro- 
portion 
of soldiers 
to the rest 
of the 
popula- 
tion is 
much 
smaller in 
civilised 
htifnes. 



The ex- 
pense of 
preparing 
the f 



Soldiers 

were not 

a distinct 

class in 

Greece 

and 

Rome, 

norat 

first in 

feudal 

times. 


But as 
war be- 
comes 
more 
compli- 
cated, 
division 
of labour 
becomes 


658 the wealth of nations 

try can be-employed as soldiers, without ruin to the country which 
pays the expence of their service.^® 

The expence of preparing the army for the field seems not to 
have become considerable in any nation, till long after that of 
maintaining it in the field had devolved entirely upon the sovereign 

f ir commonwealth. In all the different republics of ancient Greece, 

0 learn his military exercises, was a necessary part of education 
imposed by the state upon every free citizen. In every city there 
seems to have been a public field, in which, under the protection of 
the public magistrate, the young people were taught their different 
exercises by different masters. In this very simple institution, con- 
sisted the whole expence which any Grecian state seems ever to 
have been at, in preparing its citizens for war. In ancient Rome the 
exercises of the Campus Martius answered the same purpose with 
those of the Gymnasium in ancient Greece. Under the feudal gov- 
ernments, the many public ordinances that the citizens of every 
district should practise archery as well as several other military 
exercises, were intended for promoting the same purpose, but do 
not seem to have promoted it so well. Either from want of interest 
in the officers entrusted with the execution of those ordinances, or 
from some other cause, they appear to have been universally ne- 
glected; and in the progress of all those governments, military 
exercises seem to have gone gradually into disuse among the great 
body of the people. 

In the republics of ancient Greece and Rome, during the whole 
period of their existence, and under the feudal governments for a 
considerable time after their first establishment, the trade of a 
soldier was not a separate, distinct trade, which constituted the sole 
or principal occupation of a particular class of citizens, j^ery sub- 
ject o^^state, whatever might be the ordinary trade or occu- 
^tion by which he gained his livelihood, fonsid^redjiims^lf, ugon 
all ordinar y^ occasions, as fit likewise to exerc ise*Se trade ofT 
soldier, and upon many extraordinary occasions as bou nd t Q"exer- 

^ The art of war, however, as it is certainly the noblest of all arts, 
y so in the progress of improvement it necessarily becomes one of 
the most complicated among them. The state of the mechanical, as 
well as of some other arts, with which it is necessarily connected, 
determines the degree of perfection to which it is capable of being 
carried at any particular time. But in order to carry it to this de- 
gree of perfection, it is necessary that it should become the sole or 

Ed I reads ‘‘at whose expence they are employed ” Repeated all but ver- 
batim belowp4j^ 729 “ ^ 



E^XPENSE OF DEFENCE ^59 

principal occupation of a particular class of citizens, and the divi- 
sion of labour is as necessary for the improvement of this, as of 
every other art. Into other arts the division of labour is naturally 
introduced by the prudence of individuals, who find that they pro- 
mote their private interest better by confining themselves to a 
particular trade, than by exercising a great number. But it is the 
wisdom of the state only which can render the trade of a soldier a 
particular trade separate and distinct from all others. A private 
citizen who, in time of profound peace, and without any particular 
encouragement from the public, should spend the greater part of 
his time in military exercises, might, no doubt, both improve him- 
self very much in them, and amuse himself very well; but he cer- 
tainly would not promote his own interest. It is the wisdom of the 
state only which can render it for his interest to give up the greater 
part of his time to this peculiar occupation: and states have not 
always had this wisdom, even when their circumstances had be- 
come such, that the preservation of their existence required that 
they should have it. 

A shepherd has a great deal of leisure; a husbandman, in the 
rude state of husbandry, has some; an artificer or manufacturer has ' 
none at all. The first may, without any loss, employ a great deal of 
his time in martial exercises; the second may employ some part of 
it; but the last cannot employ a single hour in them without some 
loss, and his attention to his own interest naturally leads him to 
neglect them altogether. Those improvements in husbandry too, 
which the progress of arts and manufactures necessarily intro- 
duces, leave the husbandman as little leisure as the artificer. Mili- 
tary exercises come to be as much neglected by the inhabitants of 
the country as by those of the town, and the great body of the 
people becomes altogether unwarlike. That wealth, at the same 
t^e, which always follows the improvements of agriculture and 
manufactures, and which in reality is no more than the accumu- 
l^d produce of those improvements, provokes the invasion of all 
their neijgljibours. J^^.'^^^Ithy 

ijationJ^of^ jpy^iopT^eJnos^^ to be attacked; and unless 
the state takes some new measures for the public defence, the nat- 
ural habits of the people render them altogether incapable of de- 
fending themselves. 

In these circumstances, there seem to be but two methods, by 
which the state can make any tolerable provision for the public 
defence. 

It may either, first, by means of a very rigorous police, and in 
spite of the whole bent of the interest, genius and inclinations of 


necessary 
to carry 
the art to 
perfec- 
tion 


As society 
advances 
the people 
become 
unwar- 
like 


There are 
only two 
methods 
of pro- 
viding for 
defence, 



(i) to en- 
force 
military 
exercises 
and ser- 
vice, 

or (2^ to 
make the 
trade of 
the soldier 
a separate 
one 

in other 
words the 
establish- 
ment of a 
militia or 
a standing 
army. 


Militias 
were an- 
ciently 
only exer- 
cised and 
not regi- 
mented. 


Fire-arms 
brought 
about the 
change by 
making 


660 the wealth of nations 

the people, enforce the practice of military exercises, and oblige 
either all the citizens of the military age, or a certain number of 
. them, to join in some measure the trade of a soldier to whatever 
other trade or profession they may happen to carry on. 

Or secondly, by maintaining and employing a certain number of 
citizens in the constant practice of military exercises, it may ren- 
der the trade of a soldier a particular trade, separate and distinct 
from all others. 

If the state has recourse to the first of those two expedients, its 
military force is said to consist in a militia; if to the second, it is 
said to consist in a standing army. The practice of miltary exer- 
cises is the sole or principal occupation of the soldiers of a stand- 
ing army, and the maintenance or pay which the state affords them 
is the principal and ordinary fund of their subsistence. The practice 
of military exercises is only the occasional occupation of the sol- 
diers of a militia, and they derive the principal and ordinary fund 
of their subsistence from some other occupation. In a militia, the 
character of the labourer, artificer, or tradesman, predominates 
over that of the soldier: in a standing army, that of the soldier pre- 
dominates over every other character; and in this distinction seems 
to consist the essential difference between those two different species 
of military force. 

Militias have been of several different kinds. In some countries 
the citizens destined for defending the state, seem to have been 
exercised only, without being, if I may say so, regimented; that is, 
without being divided into separate and distinct bodies of troops, 
each of which performed its exercises under its own proper and 
permanent officers. In the republics of ancient Greece and Rome, 
each citizen, as long as he remained at home, seems to have prac- 
tised his exercises either separately and independently, or with such 
of his equals as he liked best; and not to have been attached to 
any particular body of troops till he was actually called upon to 
take the field. In other countries, the militia has not only been exer- 
cised, but regimented. In England, in Switzerland, and, I believe, in 
every other country of modern Europe, where any imperfect mili- 
tary force of this kind has been established, every militia-man is, 
even in time of peace, attached to a particular body of troops, 
which performs its exercises under its own proper and permanent 
officers. 

Before the invention of fire-arms, that army was superior in 
which the soldiers had, each individually, the greatest skill and 
dexterity in the use of their arms. Strength and agility of body 
were of the highest consequence, and commonly determined the 



66i 


EXPENSE OF DEFENCE 

fate of battles. But this skill and dexterity in the use of their arms, 
could be acquired only, in the same manner as fencing is^^ at 
present, by practising, not in great bodies, but each man separately, 
in a particular school, under a particular master, or with his own 
particular equals and companions. Since the invention of fire-arms, 
strength and agility of body, or even extraordinary dexterity and 
skill in the use of arms, though they are far from being of no con- 
sequence, are, however, of less consequence. The nature of the 
weapon, though it by no means puts the awkward upon a level with 
the skilful, puts him more nearly so than he ever was before. All 
the dexterity and skill, it is supposed, which are necessary for using 
it, can be well enough acquired by practising in great bodies. 

Regulari ty, .jQr j d er, and prompt obedience to command, are quali- 
ties which, in modern armies, are of more importance towards de- 
termining the fate of battles, than the dexterity and skill of the 
soldiers in the use of their arms. But the noise of fire-arms, the 
smoke, and the invisible death to which every man feels himself 
every moment exposed, as soon as he comes within cannon-shot, and 
frequently a long time before the battle can be well said to be en- 
gaged, must render it very difficult to maintain any considerable 
degree of this regularity, order, and prompt obedience, even in the 
beginning of a modern battle. In an ancient battle there was no 
noise but what arose from the human voice; there was no smoke, 
there was no invisible cause of wounds or death. Every man, till 
some mortal weapon actually did approach him, saw clearly that no 
such weapon was near him. In these circumstances, and among 
troops who had some confidence in their own skill and dexterity in 
the use of their arms, it must have been a good deal less difficult to 
preserve some degree of regularity and order, not only in the be- 
ginning, but through the whole progress of an ancient battle, and 
till one of the two armies was fairly defeated. But the habits of reg- 
ularity, order, and prompt obedience to command, can be acquired 
only by troops which are exercised in great bodies. 

A militia, however, in whatever manner it may be either dis- 
ciplined or exercised, must always be much inferior to a well- 
disciplined and well-exercised standing army. 

The soldiers, who are exercised only once a week, or once a 
month, can never be so expert in the use of their arms, as those 
who are exercised every day, or every other day; and though this 
circumstance may not be of so much consequence in modern, as it 
was in ancient times, yet the .acknowledged superiority of the Prus- 
sian troops, owing, it is said, very much to their superior expertness 
“ Ed. I reads “is acquired.” 


dexterity 
less im- 
portant. 


and disci- 
pline 
much 
more so 


A militia 
is always, 
inferior t^ 
a standing 
army, 

being less 
expert, 



and less 
well dis- 
ciplined. 


The best 
militias 
are those 
which go 
to war 
under the 
chieftains 
who rule 
m time of 
peace. 


A militia 
kept long 
lough in 
the field 
becomes a 
landing 
rmy. 


662 the wealth of nations 

in their exercise, may satisfy us that it is, even at this day, of very 
considerable consequence. 

The soldiers, who are bound to obey their officer only once a 
week or once a month, and who are at all other times at liberty to 
manage their own affairs their own way, without being in any re- 
spect accountable to him, can never be under the same awe in his 
presence, can never have the same disposition to ready obedience, 
with those whose whole life and conduct are every day directed by 
him, and who every day even rise and go to bed, or at least retire to 
their quarters, according to his orders. In what is called discipline, 
or in the habit of ready obedience, a militia must always be still 
more inferior to a standing army, than it may sometimes be in 
what is called the manual exercise, or in the management and use 
of its arms. But in modern war the habit of ready and instant obed- 
ience is of much greater consequence than a considerable super- 
iority in the management of arms. 

Those militias which, like the Tartar or Arab militia, go to war 
under the same chieftains whom they are accustomed to obey in 
peace, are by far the best. In respect for their officers, in the habit 
of ready obedience, they approach nearest to standing armies. The 
highland militia, when it served under its own chieftains, had some 
advantage of the same kind. As the highlanders, however, were not 
wandering, but stationary shepherds, as they had all a fixed habita- 
tion, and were not, in peaceable times,'*accustomed to follow their 
chieftain from place to place; so in time of war they were less will- 
ing to follow him to any considerable distance, or to continue for 
any long time in the field. When they had acquired any booty they 
were eager to return home, and his authority was seldom sufficient 
to detain them. In point of obedience they were always much in- 
ferior to what is reported of the Tartars and Arabs. As the high- 
landers too, from their stationary life, spend less of their time in 
the open air, they were always less accustomed to military exercises, 
and were less expert in the use of their arms than the Tartars and 
Arabs are said to be. 

A militia of any kind, it must be observed, however, which has 
served for several successive campaigns in the field, becomes in 
every respect a standing army. The soldiers are every day exercised 
in the use of their arms, and, being constantly under the command 
of their officers, are habituated to the same prompt obedience which 
takes place in standing armies. What they were before they took 
the field, is of little importance. They necessarily become in every 
respect a standing army, after they have passed a few campaigns 
in it. Should the war in America drag out through another cam- 



EXPENSE OF DEFENCE 663 

paign,^" the American militia may become in every respect a match 
for that standing army, of which the valour appeared, in the last 
war,^® at least not inferior to that of the hardiest veterans of France 
and Spain. 

This distinction being well understood, the history of all ages, it 
will be found, bears testimony to the irresistible superiority which a 
well-regulated standing army has over a militia. 

One of the first standing armies of which we have any distinct 
account, in any well authenticated history, is that of Philip of 
Macedon. His frequent wars with the Thracians, Illyrians, Thessa- 
lians, and some of the Greek cities in the neighbourhood of Mace- 
don, gradually formed his troops, which in the beginning were 
probably militia, to the exact discipline of a standing army. When 
he was at peace, which he was very seldom, and never for any long 
time together, he was careful not to disband that army. It van- 
quished and subdued, after a long and violent struggle, indeed, the 
gallant and well exercised militias of the principal republics of 
ancient Greece; and afterwards, with very little struggle, the 
effeminate and ill-exercised militia of the great Persian empire. 
The fall of the Greek republics and of the Persian empire, was the 
effect of the irresistible superiority which a standing army has over 
every sort of militia. It is the first great revolution in the affairs of 
mankind, of which history has preserved any distinct or circum- 
stantial account. 

The fall of Carthage, and the consequent elevation of Rome, is 
the second. All the varieties of the fortune of those two famous 
republics may very well be accounted for from the same cause. 

From the end of the first to the beginning of the second Cartha- 
ginian war, the armies of Carthage were continually in the field, 
and employed under three great generals, who succeeded one an- 
other in the command; Amilcar, his son-in-law Asdrubal, and his 
son Annibal; first in chastising their own rebellious slaves, after- 
wards in subduing the revolted nations of Africa, and, lastly, in 
conquering the great kingdom of Spain. The army which Annibal 
led from Spain into Italy must necessarily, in those different wars, 
have been gradually formed to the exact discipline of a standing 
army. The Romans, in the mean time, though they had not been 
altogether at peace, yet they had not, during this period, been en- 
gaged in any war of very great consequence; and their military 

“As ed. I was published at the beginning of March, 1776, this must have 
been written less than a year after the outbreak of the war, which lasted eight 
years. 

“The Seven Years’ War, 1756-1763. Ed. i reads “of which in the last war 
the valour appeared.” 


History 
shows the 
superior- 
ity of the 
standing 
army 

That of 
Macedon 
defeated 
the Greek 
militias. 


In the 
wars of 
Carthage 
and Rome 
standing 
armies 
defeated 
militias. 

The Car- 
thaginian 
standing 
army de- 
feated the 
Roman 
militia in 
Italy 



and 

Spam 


When the 
Roman 
militias 
became a 
standing 
army they 
defeated 
the Car- 
thaginian 
standing 
army m 
Italy 


and the 
Cartha- 
ginian 
militia in 
Spain, 
and both 
standmg 
army and 
militia in 
Africa. 


Thence- 

forward 

the 

Roman 

republic 

had 

standing 
armies, 
which 
found 
little re- 
sistance 
except 
from the 
standmg 
army of 
Macedon 


664 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

discipline, it is generally said, was a good deal relaxed. The Roman 
aimies which Annibal encountered at Trebia, Thrasymenus and 
Cannae, were militia opposed to a standing army. This circum- 
stance, it is probable, contributed more than any other to deter- 
mine the fate of those battles. 

The standing army which Annibal left behind him in Spain, had 
the like superiority over the militia which the Romans sent to op- 
pose it, and in a few years, under the command of his brother, the 
younger Asdrubal, expelled them almost entirely from that country. 

Annibal was ill supplied from home. The Roman militia, being 
continually in the field, became in the progress of the war a well 
disciplined and well exercised standing army; and the superiority 
of Annibal grew every day less and less. Asdrubal judged it neces- 
sary to lead the whole, or almost the whole of the standing army 
which he commanded in Spain, to the assistance of his brother in 
Italy. In this march he is said to have been misled by his guides; 
and in a country which he did not know, was surprized and at- 
tacked by another standing army, in every respect equal or su- 
perior to his own, and was entirely defeated. 

When Asdrubal had left Spam, the great Scipio found nothing to 
oppose him but a militia inferior to his own. He conquered and 
subdued that militia, and, in the course of the war, his own militia 
necessarily became a well-disciplined and well-exercised standing 
army. That standing army was afterwards carried to Africa, where 
it found nothing but a militia to oppose it. In order to defend Car- 
thage it became necessary to recall the standing army of Annibal. 
The disheartened and frequently defeated African militia joined it, 
and, at the battle of Zama, composed the greater part of the troops 
of Annibal. The event of that day determined the fate of the two 
rival republics. 

From the end of the second Carthaginian war till the fall of the 
Roman republic, the armies of Rome were in every respect standing 
armies. The standing army of Macedon made some resistance to 
their arms. In the height of their grandeur, it cost them two great 
wars, and three great battles, to subdue that little kingdom; of 
which the conquest would probably have been still more difficult, 
had it not been for the cowardice of its last king. The militias of all 
the civilized nations of the ancient world, of Greece, of Syria, and 
of Egypt, made but a feeble resistance to the standing armies of 
Rome. The militias of some barbarous nations defended themselves 
much better. The Scythian or Tartar militia, which Mithridates 
drew from the countries north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, 
''“This” is probably a misprint for “his,” the reading of eds 1-3 



EXPENSE OF DEFENCE 665 

were the most formidable enemies whom^^ the Romans had to en- 
counter after the second Carthaginian war. The Parthian and Ger- 
man militias too were always respectable, and, upon several occa- 
sions, gained very considerable advantages over the Roman armies. 
In general, however, and when the Roman armies were well com- 
manded, they appear to have been very much superior; and if the 
Romans did not pursue the final conquest either of Parthia or Ger- 
many, it was probably because they judged, that it was not worth 
while to add those two barbarous countries to an empire which was 
already too large. The ancient Parthians appear to have been a 
nation of Scythian or Tartar extraction, and to have always re- 
tained a good deal of the manners of their ancestors. The ancient 
Germans were, like the Scythians or Tartars, a nation of wandering 
shepherds, who went to war under the same chiefs whom they were 
accustomed to follow in peace. Their militia was exactly of the same 
kind with that of the Scythians or Tartars, from whom too they 
were probably descended. 

Many different causes contributed to relax the discipline of the 
Roman armies. Its extreme severity was, perhaps, one of those 
causes. In the days of their grandeur, when no enemy appeared 
capable of opposing them, their heavy armour was laid aside as 
unnecessarily burdensome, their laborious exercises were neglected 
as unnecessarily toilsome. Under the Roman emperors besides, the 
standing armies of Rome, those particularly which guarded the 
German and Pannonian frontiers, became dangerous to their mas- 
ters, against whom they used frequently to set up their own gen- 
erals. In order to render them less formidable, according to some 
authors, Dioclesian, according to others, Constantine, first with- 
drew them from the frontier, where they had always before been en- 
camped in great bodies, generally of two or three legions each, and 
dispersed them in small bodies through the different provincial 
towns, from whence they were scarce ever removed, but when it 
became necessary to repel an invasion. Small bodies of soldiers 
quartered in trading and manufacturing towns, and seldom re- 
moved from those quarters, became themselves tradesmen, arti- 
ficers, and manufacturers. The civil came to predominate over the 
military character; and the standing armies of Rome gradually de- 
generated into a corrupt, neglected, and undisciplined militia, in- 
capable of resisting the attack of the German and Scythian militias, 
which soon afterwards invaded the western empire. It was only by 
hiring the militia of some of those nations to oppose to that of 
others, that the emperors were for some time able to defend them- 

'®Ed I reads “which” 


Under the 

emperors 

these 

armies de- 
generated 
into 
mihtias 



Militias 
were 
gradually 
super- 
seded by 
standing 
armies in 
Western 
Europe. 


A stand- 
ing army 
does not 
lose its 
valour in 
time of 
peace, 


666 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

selves. The fall of the western empire is the third great revolution 
in the affairs of mankind, of which ancient history has preserved 
any distinct or circumstantial account. It was brought about by 
the irresistible superiority which the militia of a barbarous, has 
over that of a civilized nation; which the militia of a nation of 
shepherds, has over that of a nation of husbandmen, artificers, and 
manufacturers. The victories which have been gained by militias 
have generally been, not over standing armies, but over other mili- 
tias in exercise and discipline inferior to themselves. Such were the 
victories which the Greek militia gained over that of the Persian 
empire; and such too were those which in later times the Swiss 
militia gained over that of the Austrians and Burgundians. 

The military force of the German and Scythian nations who 
established themselves upon the ruins of the western empire, con- 
tinued for some time to be of the same kind in their new settle- 
ments, as it had been in their original country. It was a militia of 
shepherds and husbandmen, which, in time of war, took the field 
under the command of the same chieftains whom it was accustomed 
to obey in peace. It was, therefore, tolerably well exercised, and tol- 
erably well disciplined. As arts and industry advanced, however, 
the authority of the chieftains gradually decayed, and the great 
body of the people had less time to spare for military exercises. 
Both the discipline and the exercise of the feudal militia, therefore, 
went gradually to ruin, and standing armies were gradually intro- 
duced to supply the place of it. When the expedient of a standing 
army, besides, had once been adopted by one civilized nation, it 
became necessary that all its neighbours should follow the example. 
They soon found that their safety depended upon their doing so, 
and that their own militia was altogether incapable of resisting the 
attack of such an army. 

The soldiers of a standing army, though they may never have 
seen an enemy, yet have frequently appeared to possess all the 
courage of veteran troops, and the very moment that they took the 
field to have been fit to face the hardiest and most experienced vet- 
erans. In 1756, when the Russian army marched into Poland, the 
valour of the Russian soldiers did not appear inferior to that of 
the Prussians, at that time supposed to be the hardiest and most 
experienced veterans in Europe. The Russian empire, however, had 
enjoyed a profound peace for near twenty years before, and could 
at that time have very few soldiers who had ever seen an enemy. 
When the Spanish war broke out in 1739, England had enjoyed a 
profound peace for about eight and twenty years. The valour of 
her soldiers, however, far from being corrupted by that long peace, 



EXPENSE OE DEFENCE 667 

was never more distinguished than in the attempt upon Carthagena, 
the first unfortunate exploit of that unfortunate war. In a long 
peace the generals, perhaps, may sometimes forget their skill; but, 
where a well-regulated standing army has been kept up, the sol- 
diers seem never to forget their valour. 

When a civilized nation depends for its defence upon a militia, it 
is at all times exposed to be conquered by any barbarous nation 
which happens to be in its neighbourhood. The frequent conquests 
of all the civilized countries in Asia by the Tartars, sufficiently dem- 
onstrates^® the natural superiority, which the militia of a barbar- 
ous, has over that of a civilized nation. A well-regulated standing 
army is superior to every militia. Such an army, as it can best be 
maintained by an opulent and civilized nation, so it can alone de- 
fend such a nation against the invasion of a poor and barbarous 
neighbour. It is only by means of a standing army, therefore, that 
the civilization of any country can be perpetuated, or even pre- 
served for any considerable time. 

As it is only by means of a well-regulated standing army that a 
civilized country can be defended; so it is only by means of it, that 
a barbarous country can be suddenly and tolerably civilized. A 
standing army establishes, with an irresistible force, the law of the 
sovereign through the remotest provinces of the empire, and main- 
tains some degree of regular government in countries which could 
not otherwise admit of any. Whoever examines, with attention, the 
improvements which Peter the Great introduced into the Russian 
empire, will find that they almost aU resolve themselves into the 
establishment of a well-regulated standing army. It is the instru- 
ment which executes and maintains all his other regulations. That 
degree of order and internal peace, which that empire has ever 
since enjoyed, is altogether owing to the influence of that army. 

Men of republican principles have been jealous of a standing 
army as dangerous to liberty. It certainly is so, wherever the in- 
terest of the general and that of the principal officers are not neces- 
sarily connected with the support of the constitution of the state. 
The standing army of Caesar destroyed the Roman republic. The 
standing army of Cromwel turned the long parliament out of 
doors.^® But where the sovereign is himself the general, and the 
principal nobility and gentry of the country the chief officers of 
the army; where the military force is placed under the command of 
those who have the greatest interest in the support of the civil au- 

Almost certainly a misprint for “demonstrate,” the reading of ed. i. 

^Lectures, p. 29. “Cromwel,” which is Hume^s spelling, appears first in ed. 
4 here, but above, p. 563, it is so spelt in all editions. 


and is the 
only safe- 
guard of a 
civilised 
nation, 


also the 
only 

means of 
civilising 
a barbar- 
ous one. 


It is not 
unfavour- 
able to 
liberty. 



668 


Defence 
thus 
grows 
more ex- 
pensive. 


Fire-arms 
enhance 
the ex- 
pense, 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

thority, because they have themselves the greatest share of that 
authority, a standing army can never be dangerous to liberty. On 
the contrary, it may in some cases be favourable to liberty The 
security which it gives to the sovereign renders unnecessary that 
troublesome jealousy, which, in some modern republics, seems to 
watch over the minutest actions, and to be at all times ready to 
disturb the peace of every citizen. Where the security of the magis- 
trate, though supported by the principal people of the country, is 
endangered by every popular discontent; where a small tumult is 
capable of bringing about in a few hours a great revolution, the 
whole authority of government must be employed to suppress and 
punish every murmur and complaint against it. To a sovereign, on 
the contrary, who feels himself supported, not only by the natural 
aristocracy of the country, but by a well-regulated standing army, 
the rudest, the most groundless, and the most licentious remon- 
strances can give little disturbance. He can safely pardon or neglect 
them, and his consciousness of his own superiority naturally dis- 
poses him to do so. That degree of liberty which approaches to 
licentiousness can be tolerated only in countries where the sovereign 
is secured by a well-regulated standing army. It is in such countries 
only, that the public safety does not require, that the sovereign 
should be trusted with any discretionary power, for suppressing 
even the impertinent wantonness of this licentious liberty. 

The first duty of the sovereign, therefore, that of defending the 
society from the violence and injustice of other independent socie- 
ties, grows gradually more and more expensive, as the society ad- 
vances in civilization. The military force of the society, which 
originally cost the sovereign no expence either in time of peace or 
in time of war, must, in the progress of improvement, first be main- 
tained by him in time of war, and afterwards even in time of peace. 

The great change introduced into the art of war by the inven- 
tion of fire-arms, has enhanced still further both the expence of 
exercising and disciplining any particular number of soldiers in 
time of peace, and that of employing them in time of war. Both 
their arms and their ammunition are become more expensive. A 
musquet is a more expensive machine than a javelin or a bow and 
arrows; a cannon or a mortar than a balista or a catapulta. The 
powder, which is spent in a modem review, is lost irrecoverably, 
and occasions a very considerable expence. The javelins and arrows 
which were thrown or shot in an ancient one, could easily be picked 
up again, and were besides of very little value. The cannon and 
the mortar are, not only much dearer, but much heavier machines 


^Lectures, p. 263. 



EXPENSE OF JUSTICE 669 

than the balista or catapulta, and require a greater expence, not 
only to prepare them for the field, but to carry them to it. As the 
superiority of the modern artillery too, over that of the ancients is 
very great; it has become much more difficult, and consequently 
much more expensive, to fortify a town so as to resist even for a 
few weeks the attack of that superior artillery. In modern times 
many different causes contribute to render the defence of the so- 
ciety more expensive. The unavoidable effects of the natural pro- 
gress of improvement have, in this respect, been a good deal en- 
hanced by a great revolution in the art of war, to which a mere 
accident, the invention of gunpowder, seems to have given occasion. 

In modern war the great expence of fire-arms gives an evident 
advantage to the nation which can best afford that expence; and 
consequently, to an opulent and civilized, over a poor and barbar- 
ous nation. In ancient times the opulent and civilized found it dif- 
ficult to defend themselves against the poor and barbarous nations. 
In modern times the poor and barbarous find it difficult to defend 
themselves against the opulent and civilized. The invention of fire- 
arms, an invention which at first sight appears to be so pernicious, 
is certainly favourable both to the permanency and to the extension 
of civilization.^^ 


Part II 

Of the Expence of Justice 

The second duty of the sovereign, that of protecting, as far as pos- 
sible, every member of the society from the injustice or oppression 
of every other member of it, or the duty of establishing an exact 
administration of justice requires two very different degrees of ex- 
pence in the different periods of society. 

Among nations of hunters, as there is scarce any property, or at 
least none that exceeds the value of two or three days labour; so 
there is seldom any established magistrate or any regular adminis- 
tration of justice. Men who have no property can injure one an- 
other only in their persons or reputations. But when one man kills, 
wounds, beats, or defames another, though he to whom the injury 

“Hume, History, ed. of 1773, vol. ii., p. 432, says the “furious engine,” ar- 
tillery, “though it seemed contrived for the destruction of mankind and the 
overthrow of empires, has in the issue rendered battles less bloody, and has 
given greater stability to civil societies,” but his reasons are somewhat differ- 
ent from those in the text above. This part of the chapter is evidently adapted 
from Part iv. “Of Arms” in the Lectures, pp. 260-264, and the dissertation on 
the rise, progress and fall of militarism in Part i., pp. 26-34. 


and so 
give an 
advan- 
tage to 
rich 

nations, 
which is 
favour- 
able to 
civilisa- 
tion. 


The ex- 
pense of 
justice is 
different 
at differ- 
ent 

periods. 

Civil gov- 
ernment 
was first 
rendered 
necessary 
by the 
introduc- 



tion of 
property 


Property 
strength- 
ens the 
causes of 
subordi- 
nation. 

There are 
four 

causes of 
subordi- 
nation, 


670 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

is done suffers, he who does it receives no benefit. It is otherwise 
with the injuries to property. The benefit of the person who does 
the injury is often equal to the loss of him who suffers it. Envy, 
malice, or resentment, are the only passions which can prompt one 
man to injure another in his person or reputation. But the greater 
part of men are not very frequently under the influence of those 
passions ; and the very worst men are so only occasionally. As their 
gratification too, how agreeable soever it may be to certain char- 
acters, is not attended with any real or permanent advantage, it is 
in the greater part of men commonly restrained by prudential con- 
siderations. Men may live together in society with some tolerable 
degree of security, though there is no civil magistrate to protect 
them from the injustice of those passions. But avarice and ambition 
in the rich, in the poor the hatred of labour and the love of present 
ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt to invade prop- 
erty, passions much more steady in their operation, and much more 
universal in their influence. Wherever there is great property, there 
is great inequality. For one very rich man, there must be at least 
five hundred poor, and the affluence of the few supposes the in- 
digence of the many. The affluence of the rich excites the indigna- 
tion of the poor, who are often both driven by want, and prompted 
by envy, to invade his possessions. It is only under the shelter of 
the civil magistrate that the owner of that valuable property, which 
is acquired by the labour of many years, or perhaps of many suc- 
cessive generations, can sleep a single night in security. He is at all 
times surrounded by unknown enemies, whom, though he never 
provoked, he can never appease, and from whose injustice he can 
be protected only by the powerful arm of the civil magistrate con- 
tinually held up to chastise it. The acquisition of valuable and 
extensive property, therefore, necessarily requires the establish- 
ment of civil government. Where there is no property, or at least 
none that exceeds the value of two or three days labour, civil gov- 
ernment is not so necessary. 

Civil government supposed a certain subordination. But as the 
necessity of civil government gradually grows up with the acquisi- 
tion of valuable property, so the principal causes which naturally 
introduce subordination gradually grow up with the growth of that 
valuable property. 

The causes or circumstances which naturally introduce subordin- 
ation, or which naturally, and antecedent to any civil institution, 
give some men some superiority over the greater part of theit 
brethren, seem to be four in number. 

^ Ed I reads “or.” 



EXPENSE OF JUSTICE 

The first of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of (i) supe> 
personal qualifications, of strength, beauty, and agility of body; of 
wisdom, and virtue, of prudence, justice, fortitude, and moderation qualifica- 
of mind. The qualifications of the body, unless supported by those 
of the mind, can give little authority in any period of society. He is 
a very strong man, who, by mere strength of body, can force two 
weak ones to obey him. The qualifications of the mind can alone 
give very great authority. They are, however, invisible qualities; 
always disputable, and generally disputed. No society, whether bar- 
barous or civilized, has ever found it convenient to settle the rules 
of precedency of rank and subordination, according to those in- 
visible qualities; but according to something that is more plain and 
palpable. 

The second of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of (2) supe- 
age. An old man, provided his age is not so far advanced as to give 
suspicion of dotage, is every where more respected than a young 
man of equal rank, fortune, and abilities. Among nations of hunt- 
ers, such as the native tribes of North America, age is the sole 
foundation of rank and precedency. Among them, father is the 
appellation of a superior; brother, of an equal; and son, of an 
inferior. In the most opulent and civilized nations, age regulates 
rank among those who are in every other respect equ^l, and among 
whom, therefore, there is nothing else to regulate it. Among brothers 
and among sisters, the eldest always take place; and in the suc- 
cession of the paternal estate every thing which cannot be divided, 
but must go entire to one person, such as a title of honour, is in 
most cases given to the eldest. Age is a plain and palpable quality 
which admits of no dispute. 

The third of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of (3) supe- 
fortune. The authority of riches, however, though great in every 
age of society, is perhaps greatest in the rudest age of society which 
admits of any considerable inequality of fortune. A Tartar chief, 
the increase of whose herds and flocks is sufficient to maintain a 
thousand men, cannot well employ that increase in any other way 
than in maintaining a thousand men. The rude state of his society 
does not afford him any manufactured produce, any trinkets or 
baubles of any kind, for which he can exchange that part of his 
rude produce which is over and above his own consumption. The 
thousand men whom he thus maintains, depending entirely upon 
him for their subsistence, must both obey his orders in war, and 
submit to his jurisdiction in peace. He is necessarily both their 
general and their judge, and his chieftainship is the necessary effect 
of the superiority of his fortune. In an opulent and civilized so- 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


and (4) 
superior- 
ity of 
birth. 


672 

ciety a man may possess a much greater fortune, and yet not be able 
to command a dozen of people. Though the produce of his estate 
may be sufficient to maintain, and may perhaps actually maintain, 
more than a thousand people, yet as those people pay for every 
thing which they get from him, as he gives scarce any thing to any 
body but in exchange for an equivalent, there is scarce any body 
who considers himself as entirely dependent upon him, and his 
authority extends only over a few menial servants. The authority 
of fortune, however, is very great even in an opulent and civilized 
society. That it is much greater than that, either of age, or of per- 
sonal qualities, has been the constant complaint of every period of 
society which admitted of any considerable inequality of fortune. 
The first period of society, that of hunters, admits of no such in- 
equality. Universal poverty establishes there universal equality, 
and the superiority, either of age, or of personal qualities, are the 
feeble, but the sole foundations of authority and subordination. 
There is therefore little or no authority or subordination in this 
period of society. The second period of society, that of shepherds, 
admits of very great inequalities of fortune, and there is no period 
in which the superiority of fortune gives so great authority to those 
who possess it. There is no period accordingly in which authority 
and subordination are more perfectly established. The authority of 
an Arabian scherif is very great; that of a Tartar khan altogether 
despotical. 

The fourth of those causes or circumstances is the superiority of 
birth. Superiority of birth supposes an ancient superiority of for- 
tune in ffie family of the person who claims it. All families are 
equally ancient; and the ancestors of the prince, though they may 
be better known, cannot well be more numerous than those of the 
beggar. Antiquity of family means every where the antiquity either 
of wealth, or of that greatness which is commonly either founded 
upon wealth, or accompanied with it. Upstart greatness is every 
where less respected than ancient greatness.^® The hatred of usurp- 
ers, the love of the family of an ancient monarch, are, in a great 
measure, founded upon the contempt which men naturally have for 
the former, and upon their veneration for the latter. As a military 
officer submits without reluctance to the authority of a superior by 
whom he has always been commanded, but cannot bear that his 
inferior should be set over his head; so men easily submit to a fam- 
ily to whom they and their ancestors have always submitted; but 
are fired with indignation when another family, in whom they had 


Misprinted “their” in eds. 4 and 5. 


Lectures, p. 10. 



EXPENSE OF JUSTICE 673 

never acknowledged any such superiority, assumes a dominion over 
them. 

The distinction of birth, being subsequent to the inequality of 
fortune, can have no place in nations of hunters, among whom all 
men, being equal in fortune, must likewise be very nearly equal in 
birth. The son of a wise and brave man may, indeed, even among 
them, be somewhat more respected than a man of equal merit who 
has the misfortune to be the son of a fool or a coward. The differ- 
ence, however, will not be very great; and there never was, I be- 
lieve, a great family in the world whose illustration was entirely de- 
iived from the inheritance of wisdom and virtue. 

The distinction of birth not only may, but always does take 
place among nations of shepherds. Such nations are always stran- 
gers to every sort of luxury, and great wealth can scarce ever be 
dissipated among them by improvident profusion. There are no 
nations accordingly who abound more in families revered and hon- 
oured on account of their descent from a long race of great and 
illustrious ancestors; because there are no nations among whom 
wealth is likely to continue longer in the same families. 

Birth and fortune are evidently the two circumstances which 
principally set one man above another. They are the two great 
sources of personal distinction, and are therefore the principal 
causes which naturally establish authority and subordination 
among men. Among nations of shepherds both those causes operate 
with their full force. The great shepherd or herdsman, respected on 
account of his great wealth, and of the great number of those who 
depend upon him for subsistence, and revered on account of the 
nobleness of his birth, and of the immemorial antiquity of his 
illustrious family, has a natural authority over all the inferior shep- 
herds or herdsmen of his horde or clan. He can command the united 
force of a greater number of people than any of them. His military 
power is greater than that of any of them. In time of war they are 
all of them naturally disposed to muster themselves under his ban- 
ner, ratheij than under that of any other person, and his birth and 
fortune thus naturally procure to him some sort of executive power. 
By commanding too the united force of a greater number of people 
than any of them, he is best able to compel any one of them who 
may have injured another to compensate the wrong. He is the per- 
son, therefore, to whom all those who are too weak to defend them- 
selves naturally look up for protection. It is to him that they natur- 
ally complain of the injuries which they imagine have been done to 
them, and his interposition in such cases is more easily submitted 
to, even by the person complained of, than that of any other person 


The dis- 
tinction 
of birth 
is not 
present 
among 
hunters, 


but al- 
ways 
among 
shep- 
herds 


Distinc- 
tions of 
birth and 
fortune 
are both 
most 
powerful 
among 
shep- 
herds. 



Among 
shep- 
herds in- 
equality 
of fortune 
arises and 
intro- 
duces civil 
govern- 
ment, 


but the 
judicial 
authority 
was long 
a source 
of reve- 
nue 
rather 
than ex- 
pense, 


6/4 the wealth of NATIONS 

would be. His birth and fortune thus naturally procure him some 
sort of judicial authority. 

It is in the age of shepherds, in the second period of society, that 
the inequality of fortune first begins to take place, and introduces 
among men a degree of authority and subordination which could 
not possibly exist before. It thereby introduces some degree of that 
civil government which is indispensably necessary for its own pres- 
ervation: and it seems to do this naturally, and even independent 
of the consideration of that necessity. The consideration of that ne- 
cessity comes no doubt afterwards to contribute very much to 
maintain and secure that authority and subordination. The rich, in 
particular, are necessarily interested to support that order of things, 
which can alone secure them in the possession of their own advan- 
tages. Men of inferior wealth combine to defend those of superior 
wealth in the possession of their property, in order that men of su- 
perior wealth may combine to defend them in the possession of 
theirs. All the inferior shepherds and herdsmen feel that the secu- 
rity of their own herds and flocks depends upon the security of 
those of the great shepherd or herdsman; that the maintenance of 
their lesser authority depends upon that of his greater authority, 
and that upon their subordination to him depends his power of 
keeping their inferiors in subordination to them. They constitute a 
sort of little nobility, who feel themselves interested to defend the 
property and to support the authority of their own little sovereign, 
in order that he may be able to defend their property and to sup- 
port their authority. Civil government, so far as it is instituted for 
the security of property, is in reality instituted for the defence of 
the rich against the poor, or of those who have some property 
against those who have none at all.^® 

The judicial authority of such a sovereign, however, far from be- 
ing a cause of expence, was for a long time a source of revenue to 
him. The persons who applied to him for justice were always will- 
ing to pay for it, and a present never failed to accompany a petition. 
After the authority of the sovereign too was thoroughly established, 
the person found guilty, over and above the satisfaction which he 
was obliged to make to the party, was likewise forced to pay an 
amercement to the sovereign. He had given trouble, he had disturb- 
ed, he had broke the peace of his lord the king, and for those of- 
fences an amercement was thought due. In the Tartar governments 

^Lectures, p. 15 “Till there be property there can be no government, the 
very end of which is to secure wealth and to defend the rich from the poor” 
Cp Locke, Civil Government, § 94, “government has no other end but the 
preservation of property ” 



EXPENSE OF JUSTICE 675 

of Asia, in the governments of Europe which were founded by the 
German and Scythian nations who overturned the Roman empire, 
the administration of justice was a considerable source of revenue, 
both to the sovereign, and to all the lesser chiefs or lords who exer- 
cised under him any particular jurisdiction, either over some par- 
ticular tribe or clan, or over some particular territory or district. 

Originally both the sovereign and the inferior chiefs used to exer- 
cise this jurisdiction in their own persons. Afterwards they univer- 
sally found it convenient to delegate it to some substitute, bailiff, or 
judge. This substitute, however, was still obliged to account to his 
principal or constituent for the profits of the jurisdiction. Whoever 
reads the instructions which were given to the judges of the cir- 
cuit in the time of Henry IL will see clearly that those judges were 
a sort of itinerant factors, sent round the country for the purpose of 
levying certain branches of the king’s revenue. In those days the 
administration of justice, not only afforded a certain revenue to the 
sovereign, but to procure this revenue seems to have been one of the 
principal advantages which he proposed to obtain by the adminis- 
tration of justice. 

This scheme of making the administration of justice subservient which 
to the purposes of revenue, could scarce fail to be productive of sev- Produced 
eral very gross abuses. The person, who applied for justice with a abuses, 
large present in his hand, was likely to get something more than jus- 
tice; while he, who applied for it with a small one, was likely to get 
something less. Justice too might frequently be delayed, in order 
that this present might be repeated. The amercement, besides, of 
the person complained of, might frequently suggest a very strong 
reason for finding him in the wrong, even when he had not really 
been so. That such abuses were far from being uncommon, the an- 
cient history of every country in Europe bears witness. 

When the sovereign or chief exercised his judicial authority in his whether 

own person, how much soever he might abuse it, it must have been thesover- 

scarce possible to get any redress; because there could seldom be excised 
any body powerful enough to call him to account. When he exercised the judi- 

it by a bailiff, indeed, redress might sometimes be had. If it was for thori^ty in 
his own benefit only, that the bailiff had been guilty of any act of person or 
injustice, the sovereign himself might not always be unwilling to by 
punish him, or to oblige him to repair the wrong. But if it was for 
the benefit of his sovereign, if it was in order to make court to the 
person who appointed him and who might prefer him, that he had 

^ They are to be found in Tyrrell’s History of England General History of 
England, both Ecclesiastical and Ctvil, by James Tyrrell, vol. ii , 1700, pp 
576-579 The king is Richard I , not Henry II 



These 
abuses 
could not 
be reme- 
died so 
long as 
the 

sovereign 
depended 
only on 
land re- 
venue and 
court 
fees, 


676 the wealth of nations 

committed any act of oppression, redress would upon most occa^ 
sions be as impossible as if the sovereign had committed it himself. 
In all barbarous governments, accordingly, in all those ancient gov- 
ernments of Europe in particular, which were founded upon the 
ruins of the Roman empire, the administration of justice appears 
for a long time to have been extremely corrupt; far from being 
quite equal and impartial even under the best monarchs, and alto- 
gether profligate under the worst. 

Among nations of shepherds, where the sovereign or chief is only 
the greatest shepherd or herdsman of the horde or clan, he is main- 
tained in the same manner as any of his vassals or subjects, by the 
increase of his own herds or flocks. Among those nations of hus- 
bandmen who are but just come out of the shepherd state, and who 
are not much advanced beyond that state; such as the Greek tribes 
appear to have been about the time of the Trojan war, and our 
German and Scythian ancestors when they first settled upon the 
ruins of the western empire; the sovereign or chief is, in the same 
manner, only the greatest landlord of the country, and is maintain- 
ed, in the same manner as any other landlord, by a revenue derived 
from his own private estate, or from what, in modern Europe, was 
called the demesne of the crown. His subjects, upon ordinary occa- 
sions, contribute nothing to his support, except when, in order to 
protect them from the oppression of some of their fellow-subjects, 
they stand in need of his authority.^® The presents which they make 
him upon such occasions, constitute the whole ordinary revenue, the 
whole of the emoluments which, except perhaps upon some very 
extraordinary emergencies, he derives from his dominion over them. 
When Agamemnon, in Homer, offers to Achilles for his friendship 
the sovereignty of seven Greek cities, the sole advantage which he 
mentions as likely to be derived from it, was, that the people would 
honour him with presents.^® As long as such presents, as long as the 
emoluments of justice, or what may be called the fees of court, con- 
stituted in this manner the whole ordinary revenue which the sover- 
eign derived from his sovereignty, it could not well be expected, it 
could not even decently be proposed, that he should give them up 
altogether. It might, and it frequently was proposed, that he should 
regulate and ascertain them. But after they had been so regulated 
and ascertained, how to hinder a person who was all-powerful from 
extending them beyond those regulations, was still very difficult, 

Ed. I reads ^‘except when they stand in need of the interposition of his 
authority in order to protect them from the oppression of some of their fellow 
subjects.” 

^ Iliad, ix., 149-156, but the presents are not the “sole advantage” men- 
tioned. 



EXPENSE OF JUSTICE 677 

not to say impossible. During the continuance of this state of 
things, therefore, the corruption of justice, naturally resulting from 
the arbitrary and uncertain nature of those presents, scarce ad- 
mitted of any effectual remedy. 

But when from different causes, chiefly from the continually in- 
creasing expence of defending the nation against the invasion of 
other nations, the private estate of the sovereign had become alto- 
gether insufficient for defraying the expence of the sovereignty; and 
when it had become necessary that the people should, for their own 
security, contribute towards this expence by taxes of different kinds, 
it seems to have been very commonly stipulated, that no present for 
the administration of justice should, under any pretence, be accept- 
ed either by the sovereign, or by his bailiffs and substitutes, the 
judges. Those presents, it seems to have been supposed, could more 
easily be abolished altogether, than effectually regulated and ascer- 
tained. Fixed salaries were appointed to the judges, which were sup- 
posed to compensate to them the loss of whatever might have been 
their share of the ancient emoluments of justice; as the taxes more 
than compensated to the sovereign the loss of his. Justice was then 
said to be administered gratis. 

Justice, however, never was in reality administered gratis in any 
country. Lawyers and attornies, at least, must always be paid by 
the parties; and, if they were not, they would perform their duty 
still worse than they actually perform it. The fees annually paid to 
lawyers and attornies amount, in every court, to a much greater 
sum than the salaries of the judges. The circumstance of those sal- 
aries being paid by the crown, can no-where much diminish the 
necessary expence of a law-suit. But it was not so much to diminish 
the expence, as to prevent the corruption of justice, that the judges 
were prohibited from receiving any present or fee from the parties. 

The office of judge is in itself so very honourable, that men are 
willing to accept of it, though accompanied with very small emolu- 
ments. The inferior office of justice of peace, though attended with 
a good deal of trouble, and in most cases with no emoluments at 
all, is an object of ambition to the greater part of our country gen- 
tlemen. The salaries of all the different judges, high and low, to- 
gether with the whole expence of the administration and execution 
of justice, even where it is not managed with very good ceconomy, 
makes, in any civilized country, but a very inconsiderable part of 
the whole expence of government. 

The whole expence of justice too might easily be defrayed by the 
fees of court; and, without exposing the administration of justice to 
any real hazard of corruption, the public revenue might thus be en- 


but when 
taxes be- 
came ne- 
cessary, 
the 

people 
stipulated 
that no 
presents 
should be 
taken by 
judges. 


Justice is 
never ad- 
minis- 
tered 
gratis. 


The sala- 
ries of 
judges are 
a small 
part of 
the ex- 
pense of 
civilised 
govern- 
ment, 


and might 
be de- 
frayed by 
fees of 
court. 



67S the wealth of nations 

tirely discharged from a certain, though, perhaps, but a small in- 
cumbrance. It is difficult to regulate the fees of court effectually, 
where a person so powerful as the sovereign is to share in them, and 
to derive any considerable part of his revenue from them. It is very 
easy, where the judge is the principal person who can reap any bene- 
fit from them. The law can very easily oblige the judge to respect 
the regulation, though it might not always be able to make the sov- 
ereign respect it. Where the fees of court are precisely regulated 
and ascertained, where they are paid all at once, at a certain period 
of every process, into the hands of a cashier or receiver, to be by 
him distributed in certain known proportions among the different 
judges after the process is decided, and not till it is decided, there 
seems to be no more danger of corruption than where such fees are 
prohibited altogether. Those fees, without occasioning any consider- 
able increase in the expence of a law-suit, might be rendered fully 
sufficient for defraying the whole expence of justice. By not being 
paid to the judges till the process was determined, they might be 
some incitement to the diligence of the court in examining and de- 
ciding it. In courts which consisted of a considerable number of 
judges, by proportioning the share of each judge to the number of 
hours and days which he had employed in examining the process, 
either in the court or in a committee by order of the court, those 
fees might give some encouragement to the diligence of each par- 
ticular judge. Public services are never better performed than when 
their reward comes only in consequence of their being performed, 
and is proportioned to the diligence employed in performing them. 
In the different parliaments of France, the fees of court (called 
Epices and vacations) constitute the far greater part of the emol- 
uments of the judges. After all deductions are made, the neat sal- 
ary paid by the crown to a counsellor or judge in the parliament of 
Toulouse, in rank and dignity the second parliament of the king- 
dom, amounts only to a hundred and fifty livres, about six pounds 
eleven shillings sterling a year. About seven years ago that sum 
was in the same place the ordinary yearly wages of a common foot- 
man. The distribution of those Epices too is according to the dili- 
gence of the judges. A diligent judge gains a comfortable, though 
moderate, revenue by his office: An idle one gets little more than 
his salary. Those parliaments are perhaps, in many respects, not 
very convenient courts of justice; but they have never been ac- 
cused; they seem never even to have been suspected of corruption. 

The extraordinary accent here and seven lines lower down appears first in 
ed. 2. 

"•Smith was in Toulouse from February or March, 1764, to August, 1765. 
— ^Rae, Life of Adam Smithy pp. 174, 175, 188. 



EXPENSE OE JUSTICE 679 

The fees of court seem originally to have been the principal sup- 
port of the different courts of justice in England. Each court en- 
deavoured to draw to itself as much business as it could, and was, 
upon that account, willing to take cognizance of many suits which 
were not originally intended to fall under its jurisdiction. The court 
of king’s bench, instituted for the trial of criminal causes only, took 
cognizance of civil suits; the plaintiff pretending that the defend- 
ant, in not doing him justice, had been guilty of some trespass or 
misdemeanor. The court of exchequer, instituted for the levying of 
the king’s revenue, and for enforcing the payment of such debts 
only as were due to the king, took cognizance of all other contract 
debts; the plaintiff alleging that he could not pay the king, because 
the defendant would not pay him. In consequence of such fictions 
it came, in many cases, to depend altogether upon the parties be- 
fore what court they would chuse to have their cause tried; and 
each court endeavoured, by superior dispatch and impartiality, to 
draw to itself as many causes as it could. The present admirable 
constitution of the courts of justice in England was, perhaps, origi- 
nally in a great measure, formed by this emulation, which anciently 
took place between their respective judges; each judge endeavour- 
ing to give, in his own court, the speediest and most effectual rem- 
edy, which the law would admit, for every sort of injustice. Origi- 
nally the courts of law gave damages only for breach of contract. 
The court of chancery, as a court of conscience, first took upon it 
to enforce the specific performance of agreements. When the breach 
of contract consisted in the non-pa3mient of money, the damage 
sustained could be compensated in no other way than by ordering 
pa3nnent, which was equivalent to a specific performance of the 
agreement. In such cases, therefore, the remedy of the courts of 
law was sufficient. It was not so in others. When the tenant sued 
his lord for having unjustly outed him of his lease, the damages 
which he recovered were by no means equivalent to the possession 
of the land. Such causes, therefore, for some time, went all to the 
court of chancery, to the no small loss of the courts of law. It was 
to draw back such causes to themselves that the courts of law are 
said to have invented the artificial and fictitious writ of ejectment, 
the most effectual remedy for an unjust outer or dispossession of 
land.®^ 

A stamp-duty upon the law proceedings of each particular court, 
to be levied by that court, and applied towards the maintenance of 
the judges and other officers belonging to it, might, in the same 
manner, afford a revenue sufficient for defraying the expence of the 

Lectures, p, 49. Above, p. 368. 


The Eng- 
lish courts 
were orig- 
inally 
main- 
tained by 
fees, and 
this led to 
their en- 
croach- 
ments. 


Courts 
might be 
main- 
tained by 
a stamp 



duty on 
proceed- 
ings be- 
fore them, 
but this 
would 
tempt 
them to 
multiply 
such pro- 
ceedings. 


Another 
way of 
securing 
independ- 
ence 

would be 
to endow 
the courts 
with a 
revenue 
from 
property. 


The sep- 
aration of 
the judi- 
cial from 
the execu- 
tive 

power is 
due to the 
increase 
of execu- 
tive busi- 
ness. 


bbo XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

administration of justice, without bringing any burden upon the 
general revenue of the society. The judges indeed might, in this 
case, be under the temptation of multiplying unnecessarily the pro- 
ceedings upon every cause, in order to increase, as much as possible, 
the produce of such a stamp-duty. It has been the custom in mod- 
ern Europe to regulate, upon most occasions, the payment of the 
attornies and clerks of court, according to the number of pages 
which they had occasion to write; the court, however, requiring 
that each page should contain so many lines, and each line so many 
words. In order to increase their payment, the attornies and clerks 
have contrived to multiply words beyond all necessity, to the cor- 
ruption of the law language of, I believe, every court of justice in 
Europe, A like temptation might perhaps occasion a like corruption 
in the form of law proceedings. 

But whether the administration of justice be so contrived as to 
defray its own expence, or whether the judges be maintained by 
fixed salaries paid to them from some other fund, it does not seem 
necessary that the person or persons entrusted with the executive 
power should be charged with the management of that fund, or 
with the payment of those salaries. That fund might arise from the 
rent of landed estates, the management of each estate being en- 
trusted to the particular court which was to be maintained by it. 
That fund might arise even from the interest of a sum of money, 
the lending out of which might, in the same manner, be entrusted 
to the court which was to be maintained by it. A part, though in- 
deed but a small part, of the salary of the judges of the court of ses- 
sion in Scotland, arises from the interest of a sum of money. The 
necessary instability of such a fund seems, however, to render it an 
improper one for the maintenance of an institution which ought to 
last for ever. 

The separation of the judicial from the executive power seems 
originally to have arisen from the increasing business of the society, 
in consequence of its increasing improvement. The admnistration 
of justice became so laborious and so complicated a duty as to re- 
quire the undivided attention of the persons to whom it was en- 
trusted. The person entrusted with the executive power, not having 
leisure to attend to the decision of private causes himself, a deputy 
was appointed to decide them in his stead. In the progress of the 
Roman greatness, the consul was too much occupied with the poli- 
tical affairs of the state, to attend to the administration of justice. 
A prsetor, therefore, was appointed to administer it in his stead. In 
the progress of the European monarchies which were founded upon 
the ruins of the Roman empire, the sovereigns and the great lords 



EXPENSE OP PUBLIC WORKS 681 

came universally to consider the administration of justice as an of- 
fice, both too laborious and too ignoble for them to execute in their 
own persons. They universally, therefore, discharged themselves of 
it by appointing a deputy, bailiff, or judge. 

When the judicial is united to the executive power, it is scarce 
possible that justice should not frequently be sacrificed to, what is 
vulgarly called, politics. The persons entrusted with the great in- 
terests of the state may, even without any corrupt views, sometimes 
imagine it necessary to sacrifice to those interests the rights of a 
private man. But upon the impartial administration of justice de- 
pends the liberty of every individual, the sense which he has of his 
own security. In order to make every individual feel himself per- 
fectly secure in the possession of every right which belongs to him, 
it is not only necessary that the judicial should be separated from 
the executive power, but that it should be rendered as much as pos- 
sible independent of that power. The judge should not be liable to 
be removed from his office according to the caprice of that power. 
The regular payment of his salary should not depend upon the 
good-will, or even upon the good oeconomy of that power. 


Part III 

Of the Expence of public Works and public Institutions 

The third and last duty of the sovereign or commonwealth is that 
of erecting and maintaining those public institutions and those pub- 
lic works, which, though they may be in the highest degree advan- 
tageous to a great society, are, however, of such a nature, that the 
profit could never repay the expence to any individual or small 
number of individuals, and which it therefore cannot be expected 
that any individual or small number of individuals should erect or 
maintain. The performance of this duty requires too very different 
degrees of expence in the different periods of society. 

After the public institutions and public works necessary for the 
defence of the society, and for the administration of justice, both 
of which have already been mentioned, the other works and institu- 
tions of this kind are chiefly those for facilitating the commerce of 
the society, and those for promoting the instruction of the people. 
The institutions for instruction are of two kinds; those for the edu- 
cation of the youth, and those for the instruction of people of all 
ages. The consideration of the manner in which the expence of 
those different sorts of public works and institutions may be most 


The judi- 
cial 

should be 
not only 
separate 
but in- 
dependent 
of the 
executive 
power. 


The third 
duty of 
the sover- 
eign is 
the erec- 
tion and 
mainte- 
nance of 
those 
public 
works 
and in- 
stitutions 
which are 
useful but 
not cap- 
able of 
bringing 
in a profit 
to indi- 
viduals. 



These are 
chiefly in- 
stitutions 
for facOi- 
tating 
commerce 
and pro- 
moting 
instruc- 
tion. 


The ex- 
pense of 
such in- 
stitutions 
increases. 


The ex- 
pense 
need not 
be de- 
frayed 
from the 
genera] 
public 
revenue, 

but may 
be raised 
by toUs 
and other 
particular 
charges. 


682 the wealth of nations 

properly defrayed, will divide this third part of the present chapter 
into three different articles. 


Article I 

Of the public Works and Institutions for facilitating the Commerce 
of the Society 

And, first, of those which are necessary for facilitating Commerce 
in general 

That the erection and maintenance of the public works which 
facilitate the commerce of any country, such as good roads, bridges, 
navigable canals, harbours, &c. must require very different degrees 
of expence in the different periods of society, is evident without 
any proof. The expence of making and maintaining the public roads 
of any country must evidently increase with the annual produce of 
the land and labour of that country, or with the quantity and 
weight of the goods which it becomes necessary to fetch and carry 
upon those roads. The strength of a bridge must be suited to the 
number and weight of the carriages, which are likely to pass over 
it. The depth and the supply of water for a navigable canal must 
be proportioned to the number and tunnage of the lighters, which 
are likely to carry goods upon it; the extent of a harbour to the 
number of the shipping which are likely to take shelter in it. 

It does not seem necessary that the expence of those public works 
should be defrayed from that public revenue, as it is commonly 
called, of which the collection and application are in most coun- 
tries assigned to the executive power. The greater part of such pub- 
lic works may easily be so managed, as to afford a particular rev- 
enue sufficient for defraying their own expence, without bringing 
any burden upon the general revenue of the society. 

A highway, a bridge, a navigable canal, for example, may in 
most cases be both made and maintained by a small toll upon the 
carriages which make use of them: a harbour, by a moderate port- 
duty upon the tunnage of the shippmg which load or unload in it. 
The coinage, another institution for facilitating commerce, in many 
countries, not only defrays its own expence, but affords a small rev- 
enue or seignorage to the sovereign. The post-office, another institu- 
tion for the same purpose, over and above defraying its own ex- 
pence, affords in almost all countries a very considerable revenue 
to the sovereign. 

These two lines are not in eds. i and 2. See below, p. 690, note 45. 

“ Eds. 1-4 read “is”; cp. below, p. 716, note no. 



COMMERCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

When the carriages which pass over a highway or a bridge, and 
the lighters which sail upon a navigable canal, pay toll in propor- 
tion to their weight or their tunnage, they pay for the maintenance 
of those public works exactly in proportion to the wear and tear 
which they occasion of them. It seems scarce possible to invent a 
more equitable way of maintaining such works. This tax or toll too, 
though it is advanced by the carrier, is finally paid by the consumer, 
to whom it must always be charged in the price of the goods. As 
the expence of carriage, however, is very much reduced by means 
of such public works, the goods, notwithstanding the toll, come 
cheaper to the consumer than they could otherwise have done; their 
price not being so much raised by the toll, as it is lowered by the 
cheapness of the carriage. The person who finally pays this tax, 
therefore, gains by the application, more than he loses by the pay- 
ment of it. His payment is exactly in proportion to his gain. It is in 
reality no more than a part of that gain which he is obliged to give 
up in order to get the rest. It seems impossible to imagine a more 
equitable method of raising a tax. 

When the toll upon carriages of luxury, upon coaches, post- 
chaises, &c. is made somewhat higher in proportion to their weight, 
than upon carriages of necessary use, such as carts, waggons, &c. 
the indolence and vanity of the rich is made to contribute in a very 
easy manner to the relief of the poor, by rendering cheaper the 
transportation of heavy goods to all the different parts of the coun- 
try. 

When high roads, bridges, canals, &c. are in this manner made 
and supported by the commerce which is carried on by means of 
them, they can be made only where that commerce requires them, 
and consequently where it is proper to make them. Their expence 
too, their grandeur and magnificence, must be suited to what that 
commerce can afford to pay. They must be made consequently as 
it is proper to make them. A magnificent high road cannot be made 
through a desart country where there is little or no commerce, or 
merely because it happens to lead to the country villa of the in- 
tendant of the province, or to that of some great lord to whom the 
intendant finds it convenient to make his court. A great bridge can- 
not be thrown over a river at a place where nobody passes, or mere- 
ly to embellish the view from the windows of a neighbouring pal- 
ace: things which sometimes happen, in countries where works of 
this kind are carried on by any other revenue than that which they 
themselves are capable of affording. 

In several different parts of Europe the toll or lock-duty upon a 

® Ed. I reads “tear and wear.” 


Tolls ac- 
cording 
to weight 
of car- 
nages and 
capacity 
of boats 
are very 
equitable. 


If the 
tolls are 
higher on 
carriages 
of luxury, 
the rich 
contri- 
bute in an 
easy man- 
ner to the 
relief of 
the poor. 

Roads 
and 
canals, 
etc., thus 
paid for 
cannot be 
made ex- 
cept 
where 
they are 
wanted. 



Canals 
are better 
in the 
hands of 
private 
persons 
than of 
commis- 
sioners. 


But tolls 
on a high 
road can- 
not safely 
be made 
private 
property 
and must 
be com- 
mitted to 
trustees. 

The pre- 
valence 
of com- 
plaints 
against 
British 
turnpike 
tolls is 
not re- 
markable. 


6S4 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

canal is the property of private persons, whose private interest 
obliges them to keep up the canal. If it is not kept in tolerable order, 
the navigation necessarily ceases altogether, and along with it the 
whole profit which they can make by the tolls. If those tolls were 
put under the management of commissioners, who had themselves 
no interest in them, they might be less attentive to the mainte- 
nance of the works which produced them. The canal of Languedoc 
cost the king of France and the province upwards of thirteen mil- 
lions of livres, which (at twenty-eight livres the mark of silver, the 
value of French money in the end of the last century) amounted to 
upwards of nine hundred thousand pounds sterling. When that 
great work was finished, the most likely method, it was found, of 
keeping it in constant repair was to make a present of the tolls to 
Riquet the engineer, who planned and conducted the work. Those 
tolls constitute at present a very large estate to the different 
branches of the family of that gentleman, who have, therefore, a 
great interest to keep the work in constant repair. But had those 
tolls been put under the management of commissioners, who had no 
such interest, they might perhaps have been dissipated in orna- 
mental and unnecessary expences, while the most essential parts of 
the work were allowed to go to ruin. 

The tolls for the maintenance of a high road, cannot with any 
safety be made the property of private persons. A high road, though 
entirely neglected, does not become altogether impassable, though 
a canal does. The proprietors of the tolls upon a high road, there- 
fore, might neglect altogether the repair of the road, and yet con- 
tinue to levy very nearly the same tolls. It is proper, therefore, that 
the tolls for the maintenance of such work should be put under the 
management of commissioners or trustees. 

In Great Britain, the abuses which the trustees have committed 
in the management of those tolls, have in many cases been very 
justly complained of. At many turnpikes, it has been said, the 
money levied is more than double of what is necessary for execut- 
ing, in the completest manner, the work which is often executed in a 
very slovenly manner, and sometimes not executed at all. The sys- 
tem of repairing the high roads by tolls of this kind, it must be ob- 
served, is not of very long standing. We should not wonder, there- 
fore, if it has not yet been brought to that degree of perfection 
of which it seems capable.^® If mean and improper persons are fre- 
quently appointed trustees; and if proper courts of inspection and 
account have not yet been established for controlling their conduct, 
and for reducing the tolls to what is barely sufficent for executing 

Ed. I reads “seems to be capable.” 



COMMERCIAL INSTITUTIONS 685 

the work to be done by them; the recency of the institution both 
accounts and apologizes for those defects, of which, by the wisdom 
of parliament, the greater part may in due time be gradually rem- 
edied. 

The money levied at the different turnpikes in Great Britain is 
supposed to exceed so much what is necessary for repairing the 
roads, that the savings, which, with proper ceconomy, might be 
made from it, have been considered, even by some ministers, as a 
very great resource which might at some time or another be applied 
to the exigencies of the state. Government, it has been said, by tak- 
ing the management of the turnpikes into its own hands, and by 
employing the soldiers, who would work for a very small addition 
to their pay, could keep the roads in good order at a much less ex- 
pence than it can be done by trustees, who have no other workmen 
to employ, but such as derive their whole subsistence from their 
wages. A great revenue, half a million, perhaps,®*^ it has been pre- 
tended, might in this manner be gained without laying any new 
burden upon the people; and the turnpike roads might be made to 
contribute to the general expence of the state, in the same manner 
as the post-office does at present. 

That a considerable revenue might be gained in this manner, I 
have no doubt, though probably not near so much, as the projec- 
tors of this plan have supposed The plan itself, however, seems 
liable to several very important objections. 

First, if the tolls which are levied at the turnpikes should ever be 
considered as one of the resources for supplying the exigencies of 
the state, they would certainly be augmented as those exigencies 
were supposed to require. According to the policy of Great Britain, 
therefore, they would probably be augmented very fast. The facil- 
ity with which a great revenue could be drawn from them, would 
probably encourage administration to recur very frequently to this 
resource. Though it may, perhaps, be more than doubtful, whether 
half a million could by any ceconomy be saved out of the present 
tolls, it can scarce be doubted but that a million might be saved out 
of them, if they were doubled; and perhaps two millions, if they 
were tripled.^® This great revenue too migM be levied without the 
appointment of a single new officer to collect and receive it. But the 

^ Since publishing the two first editions of this book, I have got good rea- 
sons to believe that all the turnpike tolls levied in Great Britain do not pro- 
duce a neat revenue that amounts to half a million ; a sum which, under the 
management of Government, would not be sufficient to keep in repair five of 
the principal roads in the kingdom. This and the next note appear first in ed. 3. 

I have now good reasons to believe that all these conjectural sums are by 
much too large. 


It has 
been pro- 
posed 
that the 
govern- 
ment 
should 
manage 
the turn- 
pikes and 
make a 
revenue 
from 
them. 


This plan 
is open to 
the fol- 
lowing 
objec- 
tions, 

(i) the 
tolls 

would be 
raised and 
become a 
great en- 
cum- 
brance 
to com- 
merce, 



(2) a tax 
on car> 
riagesin 
propor- 
tion to 
weight 
falls prin- 
cipally 
on the 
poor, 


and (3) 
the roads 
would be 
neglect- 
er' 


High 
roads are 
under the 
executive 
in France, 


686 the wealth OF NATIONS 

turnpike tolls being continually augmented in this manner, instead 
of facilitating the inland commerce of the country, as at present, 
would soon become a very great incumbrance upon it. The expence 
of transporting all heavy goods from one part of the country to an 
other would soon be so much increased, the market for all such 
goods, consequently, would soon be so much narrowed, that their 
production would be in a great measure discouraged, and the most 
important branches of the domestic industry of the country an- 
nihilated altogether. 

Secondly, a tax upon carriages in proportion to their weight, 
though a very equal tax when applied to the sole purpose of repair- 
ing the roads, is a very unequal one, when applied to any other pur- 
pose, or to supply the common exigencies of the state. When it is 
applied to the sole purpose above mentioned, each carriage is sup- 
posed to pay exactly for the wear and tear which that carriage 
occasions of the roads. But when it is applied to any other purpose 
each carriage is supposed to pay for more than that wear and tear, 
and contributes to the supply of some other exigency of the state. 
But as the turnpike toll raises the price of goods in proportion to 
their weight, and not to their value, it is chiefly paid by the con- 
sumers of coarse and bulky, not by those of precious and light com- 
modities. Whatever exigency of the state therefore this tax might 
be intended to supply, that exigency would be chiefly supplied at 
the expence of the poor, not of the rich; at the expence of those 
who are least able to supply it, not of those who are most able. 

Thirdly, if government should at any time neglect the reparation 
of the high roads, it would be still more difficult, than it is at pres- 
ent, to compel the proper application of any part of the turnpike 
tolls. A large revenue might thus be levied upon the people, with- 
out any part of it being applied to the only purpose to which a rev- 
enue levied in this manner ought ever to be applied. If the mean- 
ness and poverty of the trustees of turnpike roads render it some- 
times difficult at present to oblige them to repair their wrong; their 
wealth and greatness would render it ten times more so in the case 
which is here supposed. 

In France, the funds destined for the reparation of the high roads 
are under the immediate direction of the executive power. Those 
funds consist, partly in a certain number of days’ labour which 
the country people are in most parts of Europe obliged to give to the 
reparation of the highways; and partly in such a portion of the 

“ Ed. I reads here and two lines lower down “tear and wear.” 

" Ed. I reads “partly in the six days* labour.” 



COMMERCIAL INSTITUTIONS 687 

general revenue of the state as the king chuses to spare from his 
other expences. 

By the ancient law of France, as well as by that of most other 
parts of Europe, the labour of the country people was under the 
direction of a local or provincial magistracy, which had no immedi- 
ate dependency upon the king’s council. But by the present prac- 
tice both the labour of the country people, and whatever other fund 
the king may chuse to assign for the reparation of the high roads 
in any particular province or generality, are entirely under the 
management of the intendant; an officer who is appointed and re- 
moved by the king’s council, who receives his orders from it, and is 
in constant correspondence with it. In the progress of despotism the 
authority of the executive power gradually absorbs that of every 
other power in the state, and assumes to itself the management of 
every branch of revenue which is destined for any public purpose. 
In France, however, the great post-roads, the roads which make 
the communication between the principal towns of the kingdom, 
are in general kept in good order; and in some provinces are even 
a good deal superior to the greater part of the turnpike roads of 
England. But what we call the cross-roads, that is, the far greater 
part of the roads in the country, are entirely neglected, and are in 
many places absolutely impassable for any heavy carriage. In 
some places it is even dangerous to travel on horseback, and mules 
are the only conveyance which can safely be trusted. The proud 
minister of an ostentatious court may frequently take pleasure in 
executing a work of splendour and magnificence, such as a great 
highway, which is frequently seen by the principal nobility, whose 
applauses not only flatter his vanity, but even contribute to support 
his interest at court. But to execute a great number of little works, 
in which nothing that can be done can make any great appearance, 
or excite the smallest degree of admiration in any traveller, and 
which, in short, have nothing to recommend them but their ex- 
treme utility, is a business whidi appears m every respect too mean 
and paultry to merit the attention of so great a magistrate. Under 
such an administration, therefore, such works are almost always en- 
tirely neglected. 

In China, and in several other governments of Asia, the execu- 
tive power charges itself both with the reparation of the high roads, 
and with the maintenance of the navigable canals. In the instruc- 
tions which are given to the governor of each province, those ob- 

Here and in the next sentence for “the labour of the country people,” ed. 
I reads “the six days’ labour.” 


and great 
post roads 
are gen- 
erally 
good, but 
all the 
rest en- 
tirely 
neglected. 


The ex- 
ecutive in 
China 
and other 
parts of 



Asia 

maintains 
both high 
roads and 
canals, 
it is said, 
in good 
condition, 
but this 
would not 
be the 
casein 
Europe. 


688 XHE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

jects, it is said, are constantly recommended to him, and the judg- 
ment which the court forms of his conduct is very much regulated 
by the attention which he appears to have paid to this part of his 
instructions. This branch of public police accordingly is said to be 
very much attended to in all those countries, but particularly in 
China, where the high roads, and still more the navigable canals, it 
is pretended, exceed very much every thing of the same kind which 
is known in Europe. The accounts of those works, however, which 
have been transmitted to Europe, have generally been drawn up by 
weak and wondering travellers; frequently by stupid and lying mis- 
sionaries. If they had been examined by more intelligent eyes, and 
if the accounts of them had been reported by more faithful wit- 
nesses, they would not, perhaps, appear to be so wonderful. The ac- 
count which Bernier gives of some works of this kind in Indostan, 
falls very much short of what had been reported of them by other 
travellers, more disposed to the marvellous than he was.^^ It may 
too, perhaps, be in those countries, as it is in France, where the 
great roads, the great communications which are likely to be the 
subjects of conversation at the court and in the capital, are at- 
tended to, and all the rest neglected. In China, besides, in Indo- 
stan, and in several other governments of Asia, the revenue of the 
sovereign arises almost altogether from a land-tax or land-rent, 
which rises or falls with the rise and fall of the annual produce 
of the land. The great interest of the sovereign, therefore, his rev- 
enue, is in such countries necessarily and immediately connected 
with the cultivation of the land, with the greatness of its produce, 
and with the value of its produce. But in order to render that pro- 
duce both as great and as valuable as possible, it is necessary to 
procure to it as extensive a market as possible, and consequently to 
establish the freest, the easiest, and the least expensive communica- 
tion between all the different parts of the country; which can be 
done only by means of the best roads and the best navigable ca- 
nals. But the revenue of the sovereign does not, in any part of Eu- 
rope, arise chiefly from a land-tax or land-rent. In all the great 
kingdoms of Europe, perhaps, the greater part of it may ultimately 
depend upon the produce of the land: But that dependency is nei- 
ther so immediate, nor so evident. In Europe, therefore, the sover* 

Voyages de Frangois Bernier ^ Amsterdam, 1710, can scarcely be said te 
discredit the ordinary eulogy of Indian roads and canals by an account of any 
particular works, but it does so by not mentioning them in places where it 
would be natural to do so if they had existed or been remarkable. See tom. ii., 
p. 249, “les grandes rivieres qui en ces quartiers n’ont ordinairement point de 
ponts.” 

'®Ed. I reads “or.” 



COMMERCIAL INSTITUTIONS ^^9 

eign does not feel himself so directly called upon to promote the 
increase, both in quantity and value, of the produce of the land, or, 
by maintaining good roads and canals, to provide the most exten- 
sive market for that produce. Though it should be true, therefore, 
what I apprehend is not a little doubtful, that in some parts of Asia 
this department of the public police is very properly managed by 
the executive power, there is not the least probability that, during 
the present state of things, it could be tolerably managed by that 
power in any part of Europe. 

Even those public works which are of such a nature that they Public 
cannot afford any revenue for maintaining themselves, but of which 
the conveniency is nearly confined to some particular place or dis- nature 
trict, are always better maintained by a local or provincial rev- should be 
enue, under the management of a local and provincial administra- ^^g^by 
tion, than by the general revenue of the state, of which the execu- local 
tive power must always have the management. Were the streets of revenue. 
London to be lighted and paved at the expence of the treasury, is 
there any probability that they would be so well lighted and paved 
as they are at present, or even at so small an expence? The ex- 
pence, besides, instead of being raised by a local tax upon the in- 
habitants of each particular street, parish, or district in London, 
would, in this case, be defrayed out of the general revenue of the 
state, and would consequently be raised by a tax upon all the in- 
habitants of the kingdom, of whom the greater part derive no sort 
of benefit from the lighting and paving of the streets of London. 

The abuses which sometimes creep into the local and provincial The 
administration of a local and provincial revenue, how enormous so- 
ever they may appear, are in reality, however, almost always very ministra- 
trifling, in comparison of those which commonly take place in the tion are 
administration and expenditure of the revenue of a great empire, g^^pared 
They are, besides, much more easily corrected. Under the- local or with 
provincial administration of the justices of the peace in Great those of 
Britain, the six days labour which the country people are obliged to uunfetra- 
give to the reparation of the highways, is not always perhaps very tion of 
judiciously applied, but it is scarce ever exacted with any circum- 
stance of cruelty or oppression. In France, under the administra- venue." 
tion of the intendants, the application is not always more judicious, 
and the exaction is frequently the most cruel and oppressive. Such 
Corvees, as they are called, make one of the principal instruments 
of tyranny by which those officers chastise any parish or com- 
muneaute which has had the misfortune to fall under their dis- 
pleasure.**^ 

I reads “tyranny by which the intendant chastises any parish or 
communaute which has had the misfortune to fall under his displeasure.” 



Some 
particular 
institu- 
tions are 
required 
to facili- 
tate par- 
ticular 
branches 
of com- 
merce, as 
trade 
with bar- 
barous 
nations 
requires 
forts, and 
trade 
with 

other na- 
tions re- 
quires 
ambassa- 
dors. 


690 xhe wealth of nations 

Of the Public Works and Institutions which are necessary for facili- 
tating particular Branches of Commerce 

The object of the {)ublic works and institutions above mentioned 
is to facilitate commerce in general. But in order to facilitate some 
particular branches of it, particular institutions are necessary, 
which again require a particular and extraordinary expence. 

Some particular branches of commerce, which are carried on 
with barbarous and uncivilized nations, require extraordinary pro- 
tection. An ordinary store or counting-house could give little secur- 
ity to the goods of the merchants who trade to the western coast of 
Africa. To defend them from the barbarous natives, it is necessary 
that the place where they are deposited, should be, in some meas- 
ure, fortified. The disorders in the government of Indostan have 
been supposed to render a like precaution necessary even among 
that mild and gentle people; and it was under pretence of securing 
their persons and property from violence, that both the English and 
French East India Companies were allowed to erect the first forts 
which they possessed in that country. Among other nations, whose 
vigorous government will suffer no strangers to possess any forti- 
fied place within their territory, it may be necessary to maintain 
some ambassador, minister, or consul, who may both decide, ac- 
cording to their own customs, the differences arising among his own 
countrymen; and, in their disputes with the natives, may, by means 
of his public character, interfere with more authority, and afford 
them a more powerful protection, than they could expect from any 
private man. The interests of commerce have frequently made it 
necessary to maintain ministers in foreign countries, where the pur- 
poses, either of war or alliance, would not have required any. The 
commerce of the Turkey Company first occasioned the establish- 
ment of an ordinary ambassador at Constantinople.^® The first 
English embassies to Russia arose altogether from commercial in- 
terests.^'^ The constant interference which those interests neces- 
sarily occasioned between the subjects of the different states of Eu- 
rope, has probably introduced the custom of keeping, in all neigh- 
bouring countries, ambassadors or ministers constantly resident 
even in the time of peace. This custom, unknown to ancient times, 
seems not to be older than the end of the fifteenth or beginning of 
the sixteenth century; that is, than the time when commerce first 

This section (ending on p. 716) appears first in Additions and Corrections 
and ed. 3. 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1606. " lUd., a.d. 1620, and cp. a.d. 1623. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 691 

began to extend itself to the greater part of the nations of Europe, 
and when they first began to attend to its interests. 

It seems not unreasonable, that the extraordinary expence, which 
the protection of any particular branch of commerce may occa- 
sion, should be defrayed by a moderate tax upon that particular 
branch; by a moderate fine, for example, to be paid by the traders 
when they first enter into it, or, what is more equal, by a particular 
duty of so much per cent, upon the goods which they either import 
into, or export out of, the particular countries with which it is car- 
ried on. The protection of trade in general, from pirates and free- 
booters, is said to have given occasion to the first institution of the 
duties of customs. But, if it was thought reasonable to lay a gen- 
eral tax upon trade, in order to defray the expence of protecting 
trade in general, it should seem equally reasonable to lay a particu- 
lar tax upon a particular branch of trade, in order to defray the 
extraordinary expence of protecting that branch. 

The protection of trade in general has always been considered as 
essential to the defence of the commonwealth, and, upon that ac- 
count, a necessary part of the duty of the executive power. The col- 
lection and application of the general duties of customs, therefore, 
have always been left to that power. But the protection of any par- 
ticular branch of trade is a part of the general protection of trade; 
a part, therefore, of the duty of that power; and if nations always 
acted consistently, the particular duties levied for the purposes of 
such particular protection, should always have been left equally to 
its disposal. But in this respect, as well as in many others, nations 
have not always acted consistently; and in the greater part of the 
commercial states of Europe, particular companies of merchants 
have had the address to persuade the legislature to entrust to them 
the performance of this part of the duty of the sovereign, together 
with all the powers which are necessarily connected with it. 

These companies, though they may, perhaps, have been useful 
for the first introduction of some branches of commerce, by making, 
at their own expence, an experiment which the state might not 
think it prudent to make, have in the long-run proved, universally, 
either burdensome or useless, and have either mismanaged or con- 
fined the trade. 

When those companies do not trade upon a joint stock, but are 
obliged to admit any person, properly qualified, upon paying a 
certain fine, and agreeing to submit to the regulations of the com- 
pany, each member trading upon his own stock, and at his own 
risk, they are called regulated companies. When they trade upon a 


Branches 
of com- 
merce 
which re- 
quire ex- 
traordi- 
nary ex- 
pense for 
their pro- 
tection 
may rea- 
sonably 
bear a 
particular 
tax. 


The pro- 
ceeds of 
such taxes 
should 
be at the 
disposal 
of the 
execu- 
tive, but 
have 
often 
been 
given to 
com- 
panies of 
mer- 
chants, 


which 
have al- 
ways 
proved 
in the 
long run 
burden- 
some or 
useless. 

They are 
either 
regulated 
or joint 
stock 



com- 

panies. 


Regulat- 
ed com- 
panies 
are like 
corpora- 
tions of 
trades 
and act 
like them, 


There are 
five exist- 
ing regu- 
lated 
com- 
panies, 

of which 
the Ham- 
burg, 
Russian 


692 the wealth of nations 

joint stock, each member sharing in the common profit or loss in 
proportion to his share in this stock, they are called joint stock 
companies.^® Such companies, whether regulated or joint stock, 
sometimes have, and sometimes have not, exclusive priviliges. 

Regulated companies resemble, in every respect, the corpora- 
tions of trades, so common in the cities and towns of all the differ- 
ent countries of Europe; and are a sort of enlarged monopolies of 
the same kind. As no inhabitant of a town can exercise an incorpo- 
rated trade, without first obtaining his freedom in the corporation, 
so in most cases no subject of the state can lawfully carry on any 
branch of foreign trade, for which a regulated company is estab- 
lished, without first becoming a member of that company. The 
monopoly is more or less strict according as the terms of admission 
are more or less difficult; and according as the directors of the com- 
pany have more or less authority, or have it more or less in their 
power to manage in such a manner as to confine the greater part of 
the trade to themselves and their particular friends. In the most an- 
cient regulated companies the privileges of apprenticeship were the 
same as in other corporations; and entitled the person who had 
served his time to a member of the company, to become himself a 
member, either without papng any fine, or upon paying a much 
smaller one than what was exacted of other people. The usual cor- 
poration spirit, wherever the law does not restrain it, prevails in all 
regulated companies. When they have been allowed to act accord- 
ing to their natural genius, they have always, in order to confine the 
competition to as small a number of persons as possible, endeav- 
oured to subject the trade to many burdensome regulations. When 
the law has restrained them from doing this, they have become al- 
together useless and insignificant. 

The regulated companies for foreign commerce, which at present 
subsist in Great Britain, are, the ancient merchant adventurers 
company now commonly called the Hamburgh Company, the 
Russia Company, the Eastland Company, the Turkey Company, 
and the African Company. 

The terms of admission into the Hamburgh Company, are now 
said to be quite easy; and the directors either have it not in their 
power to subject the trade to any burdensome restraint or regu- 

“Sir Josiah Child, New Discourse of Trade, etc., chap, iii., divides com- 
panies into those in joint stock and those “who trade not by a joint stock, but 
only are under a government and regulation.” 

^ The company or society of the Merchant Adventurers of England. 

“Additions and Corrections reads “Russian,” probably a misprint, though 
“Russian,” which is incorrect, appears on the next page. 

“ Eds. 1-3 read “restraints.” 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE ^93 

lations, or, at least, have not of late exercised that power. It has 
not always been so. About the middle of the last century, the fine 
for admission was fifty, and at one time one hundred pounds,®^ and 
the conduct of the company was said to be extremely oppressive. In 
1643, ^^645, and in 1661, the clothiers and free traders of the 
West of England complained of them to parliament, as of monopo- 
lists who confined the trade and oppressed the manufactures of the 
country.®^ Though those complaints produced no act of parliament, 
they had probably intimidated the company so far, as to oblige 
them to reform their conduct. Since that time, at least, there 
have been no complaints against them. By the loth and nth of 
William III. c. 6.^® the fine for admission into the Russian Com- 
pany was reduced to five pounds; and by the 2Sth. of Charles 11. c. 
7. that for admission into the Eastland Company, to forty shillings, 
while, at the same time, Sweden, Denmark and Norway, all the 
countries on the north side of the Baltic, were exempted from their 
exclusive charter.^® The conduct of those companies had probably 
given occasion to those two acts of parliament. Before that time, 
Sir Josiah Child had represented both these and the Hamburgh 
Company as extremely oppressive, and imputed to their bad man- 
agement the low state of the trade, which we at that time carried on 
to the countries comprehended within their respective charters.^^ 
But though such companies may not, in the present times, be very 
oppressive, they are certainly altogether useless. To be merely use- 
less, indeed, is perhaps the highest eulogy which can every justly be 
bestowed upon a regulated company; and all the three companies 
above mentioned seem, in their present state, to deserve this 
eulogy. 

The fine for admission into the Turkey Company, was formerly 
twenty-five pounds for all persons under twenty-six years of age, 
and fifty pounds for all persons above that age. Nobody but mere 
merchants could be admitted; a restriction which excluded all 


Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1643: the fine was doubled in that year, being 
raised to £ioo for Londoners and £50 for others. 

“Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1661, under which the other two years are also 
mentioned. 

Additions and Corrections and eds. 3 and 4 read “has.” Smith very prob- 
ably wrote “there has been no complaint.” 

“ The preamble recites the history of the company. 

“Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1672. 

New Discourse of Trade, chap, iii., quoted by Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 
1672. This part of the book was not published till long after 1672, but seems 
to have been written before the closing of the Exchequer in that year. 


and East- 
land 
Com- 
panies are 
merely 
useless. 


The Tur- 
key Com- 
pany is an 
oppres- 
sive mo- 
nopoly. 



^94 the wealth of NATIONS 

shop-keepers and retailers.^^ By a bye-law, no British manufac- 
tures could be exported to Turkey but in the general ships of the 
company; and as those ships sailed always from the port of Lon- 
don, this restriction confined the trade to that expensive port, 
and the traders, to those who lived in London and in its neighbour- 
hood. By another bye-law, no person living within twenty miles of 
London, and not free of the city, could be admitted a member; an- 
other restriction, which, joined to the foregoing, necessarily ex- 
cluded all but the freemen of London.^® As the time for the loading 
and sailing of those general ships depended altogether upon the di- 
rectors, they could easily fill them with their own goods and those 
of their particular friends, to the exclusion of others, who, they 
might pretend, had made their proposals too late. In this state of 
things, therefore, this company was in every respect a strict and op- 
pressive monopoly. Those abuses gave occasion to the act of the 
26th of George II. c. 18. reducing the fine for admission to twenty 
pounds for all persons, without any distinction of ages, or any re- 
striction, either to mere merchants, or to the freemfen of London; 
and granting to all such persons the liberty of exporting, from all 
the ports of Great Britain to any port in Turkey, all British goods 
of which the exportation was not prohibited; and of importing 
from thence all Turkish goods, of which the importation was not 
prohibited, upon paying both the general duties of customs, and the 
particular duties assessed for defraying the necessary expences of 
the company; and submitting, at the same time, to the lawful au- 
thority of the British ambassador and consuls resident in Turkey, 
and to the bye-laws of the company duly enacted. To prevent any 
oppression by those bye-laws, it was by the same act ordained, that 
if any seven members of the company conceived themselves ag- 
grieved by any bye-law which should be enacted after the passing 
of this act, they might appeal to the Board of Trade and Planta- 
tions (to the authority of which, a committee of the privy council 
has now succeeded), provided such appeal was brought within 
twelve months after the bye-law was enacted ; and that if any seven 
members conceived themselves aggrieved by any bye-law which 
had been enacted before the passing of this act, they might bring a 
like appeal, provided it was within twelve months after the day on 
which this act was to take place. The experience of one year, how- 
ever, may not always be sufficient to discover to all the members of 
a great company the pernicious tendency of a particular bye-law; 

® Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1605, 1643, 1753. 

Additions and Corrections reads “extensive.” 

®°See the preamble to 26 Geo. IL, c. 18.— -Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1753. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 695 

and if several of them should afterwards discover it, neither the 
Board of Trade, nor the committee of council, can afford them any 
redress. The object, besides, of the greater part of the bye-laws of 
all regulated companies, as well as of all other corporations, is not 
so much to oppress those who are already members, as to discour- 
age others from becoming so; which may be done, not only by a 
high fine, but by many other contrivances. The constant view of 
such companies is always to raise the rate of their own profit as 
high as they can; to keep the market, both for the goods which they 
export, and for those which they import, as much understocked as 
they can: which can be done only by restraining the competition, 
or by discouraging new adventurers from entering into the trade. A 
fine even of twenty pounds, besides, though it may not, perhaps, be 
sufficient to discourage any man from entering into the Turkey 
trade, with an intention to continue in it, may be enough to dis- 
courage a speculative merchant from hazarding a single adventure 
in it. In all trades, the regular established traders, even though not 
incorporated, naturally combine to raise profits, which are no-way 
so likely to be kept, at all times, down to their proper level, as by 
the occasional competition of speculative adventurers. The Turkey 
trade, though in some measure laid open by this act of parliament, 
is still considered by many people as very far from being altogether 
free. The Turkey Company contribute to maintain an ambassador 
and two or three consuls, who, like other public ministers, ought to 
be maintained altogether by the state, and the trade laid open to all 
his majesty’s subjects. The different taxes levied by the company, 
for this and other corporation purposes, might afford a revenue 
much more than sufficient to enable the state to maintain such min- 
isters. 

Regulated companies, it was observed by Sir Josiah Child, 
though they had frequently supported public ministers, had never 
maintained any forts or garrisons in the countries to which they 
traded; whereas joint stock companies frequently had.®^ And in 
reality the former seem to be much more unfit for this sort of ser- 
vice than the latter. First, the directors of a regulated company 
have no particular interest in the prosperity of the general trade of 
the company, for the sake of which, such forts and garrisons are 
maintained. The decay of that general trade may even frequently 
contribute to the advantage of their own private trade; as by di- 
minishing the number of their competitors, it may enable them 
both to buy cheaper, and to sell dearer. The directors of a joint 
stock company, on the contrary, having only their share m the 

^ New Discourse of Trader chap. iii. 


Regulat- 
ed com- 
panies 
are more 
unfit to 
maintain 
forts than 
joint 
stock 
com- 
panies, 



but the 

African 

company 

was 

charged 

with this 

duty. 


The 
statute 
establish- 
ing the 
company 
endeav- 
voured 
ineffectu- 
ally to re- 


696 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

profits which are made upon the common stock committed to their 
management, have no private trade of their own, of which the in- 
terest can be separated from that of the general trade of the com- 
pany. Their private interest is connected with the prosperity of the 
general trade of the company; and with the maintenance of the 
forts and garrisons which are necessary for its defence. They are 
more likely, therefore, to have that continual and careful attention 
which that maintenance necessarily requires. Secondly, The direc- 
tors of a joint stock company have always the management of a 
large capital, the joint stock of the company, a part of which they 
may frequently employ, with propriety, in building, repairing, and 
maintaining such necessary forts and garrisons. But the directors 
of a regulated company, having the management of no common 
capital, have no other fund to employ in this way, but the casual 
revenue arising from the admission fines, and from the corporation 
duties, imposed upon the trade of the company. Though they had 
the same interest, therefore, to attend to the maintenance of such 
forts and garrisons, they can seldom have the same ability to ren- 
der that attention effectual. The maintenance of a public minister 
requiring scarce any attention, and but a moderate and limited ex- 
pence, is a business much more suitable both to the temper and 
abilities of a regulated company. 

Long after the time of Sir Josiah Child, however, in 1750, a 
regulated company was established, the present company of mer- 
chants trading to Africa, which was expressly charged at first with 
the maintenance of all the British forts and garrisons that lie be- 
tween Cape Blanc and the Cape of Good Hope, and afterwards 
with that of those only which lie between Cape Rouge and the Cape 
of Good Hope. The act which establishes this company (the 23d of 
George II. c. 31.) seems to have had two distinct objects in view; 
first, to restrain effectually the oppressive and monopolizing spirit 
which is natural to the directors of a regulated company; and sec- 
ondly, to force them, as much as possible, to give an attention, 
which is not natural to them, towards the maintenance of forts and 
garrisons.®^ 

For the first of these purposes, the fine for admission is limited 
to forty shillings. The company is prohibited from trading in their 
corporate capacity, or upon a joint stock; from borrowing money 
upon common seal, or from laying any restraints upon the trade 
which may be carried on freely from all places, and by all persons 
being British subjects, and paying the fine. The government is in 
a committee of nine persons who meet at London, but who are 

Below, p. 701. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 697 

chosen annually by the freemen of the company at London, Bristol strain the 
and Liverpool; three from each place. No committee-man can be 
continued in office for more than three years together. Any com- poly, 
mittee-man might be removed by the Board of Trade and Planta- 
tions; now by a committee of council, after being heard in his own 
defence. The committee are forbid to export negroes from Africa, 
or to import any African goods into Great Britain. But as they are 
charged with the maintenance of forts and garrisons, they may, for 
that purpose, export from Great Britain to Africa, goods and stores 
of different kinds. Out of the monies which they shall receive from 
the company, they are allowed a sum not exceeding eight hundred 
pounds for the salaries of their clerks and agents at London, Bristol 
and Liverpool, the house-rent of their office at London, and all 
other expences of management, commission and agency in Eng- 
land. What remains of this sum, after defra5dng these different ex- 
pences, they may divide among themselves, as compensation for 
their trouble, in what manner they think proper. By this constitu- 
tion, it might have been expected, that the spirit of monopoly 
would have been effectually restrained, and the first of these pur- 
poses sufficiently answered. It would seem, however, that it had 
not. Though by the 4th of George III. c. 20. the fort of Senegal, 
with all its dependencies, had been vested in the company of mer- 
chants trading to Africa, yet in the year following (by the sth of 
George III. c. 44.), not only Senegal and its dependencies, but the 
whole coast from the port of SaUee, in south Barbary, to Cape 
Rouge, was exempted from the jurisdiction of that company, was 
vested in the crown, and the trade to it declared free to all his 
majesty’s subjects. The company had been suspected of restraining 
the trade, and of establishing some sort of improper monopoly. It 
is not, however, very easy to conceive how, under the regulations of 
the 23d George II. they could do so. In the printed debates of the 
House of Commons, not always the most authentic records of truth, 

I observe, however, that they have been accused of this. The mem- 
bers of the committee of nine being all merchants, and the gover- 
nors and factors in their different forts and settlements being all de- 
pendent upon them, it is not unlikely that the latter might have 
given peculiar attention to the consignments and commissions of 
the former, which would establish a real monopoly. 

For the second of these purposes, the maintenance of the forts and Par- 

and garrisons, an annual sum has been allotted to them by parlia- liament 
ment, generally about 13,000^. For the proper application of this £13^3^00 a 
sum, the committee is obliged to account annually to the Cursitor year to 

Additions and Corrections reads “all the other.” 



698 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the com- Baron of Exchequer; which account is afterwards to be laid before 
tos parliament. But parliament, which gives so little attention to the 
which application of millions, is not likely to give much to that of 13,000/. 

sum they a-year; and the Cursitor Baron of Exchequer, from his profession 

misapply. education, is not likely to be profoundly skilled in the proper 
expence of forts and garrisons. The captains of his majesty’s navy, 
indeed, or any other commissioned officers, appointed by the Board 
of Admiralty, may enquire into the condition of the forts and gar- 
risons, and report their observations to that board. But that board 
seems to have no direct jurisdiction over the committee, nor any 
authority to correct those whose conduct it may thus enquire into; 
and the captains of his majesty’s navy, besides, are not supposed 
to be always deeply learned in the science of fortification. Removal 
from an office, which can be enjoyed only for the term of three 
years, and of which the lawful emoluments, even during that term, 
are so very small, seems to be the utmost punishment to which any 
committee-man is liable, for any fault, except direct malversation, 
or embezzlement, either of the public money, or of that of the com- 
pany; and the fear of that punishment can never be a motive of 
sufficient weight to force a continual and careful attention to a 
business, to which he has no other interest to attend. The commit- 
tee are accused of having sent out bricks and stones from England 
for the reparation of Cape Coast Castle on the coast of Guinea, a 
business for which parliament had several times granted an extra- 
ordinary sum of money. These bricks and stones too, which had 
thus been sent upon so long a voyage, were said to have been of so 
bad a quality, that it was necessary to rebuild from the foundation 
the walls which had been repaired with them. The forts and gar- 
risons which lie north of Cape Rouge, are not only maintained at 
the expence of the state, but are under the immediate government 
of the executive power; and why those which lie south of that 
Cape, and which too are, in part at least, maintained at the ex- 
pence of the state, should be under a different government, it seems 
not very easy even to imagine a good reason. The protection of the 
Mediterranean trade was the original purpose or pretence of the 
garrisons of Gibraltar and Minorca, and the maintenance and gov- 
ernment of those garrisons has always been, very properly, com- 
mitted, not to the Turkey Company, but to the executive power. In 
the extent of its dominion consists, in a great measure, the pride 
and dignity of that power; and it is not very likely to fail in atten- 
tion to what is necessary for the defence of that dominion. The 
garrisons at Gibraltar and Minorca, accordingly, have never been 
neglected; though Minorca has been twice taken, and is now prob- 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE ^99 

ably lost for ever, that disaster was never even imputed to any ne- 
glect in the executive power. I would not, however, be understood 
to insinuate, that either of those expensive garrisons was ever, even 
in the smallest degree, necessary for the purpose for which they 
were originally dismembered from the Spanish monarchy. That 
dismemberment, perhaps, never served any real purpose than to 
alienate from England her natural ally the King of Spain, and to 
unite the two principal branches of the house of Bourbon in a much 
stricter and more permanent alliance than the ties of blood could 
ever have united them. 

Joint stock companies, established either by royal charter or by 
act of parliament, differ in several respects, not only from regu- 
lated companies, but from private copartneries. 

First, In a private copartnery, no partner, without the consent of 
the company, can transfer his share to another person, or introduce 
a new member into the company. Each member, however, may, up- 
on proper warning, withdraw from the copartnery, and demand 
payment from them of his share of the common stock. In a joint 
stock company, on the contrary, no member can demand payment 
of his share from the company; but each member can, without their 
consent, transfer his share to another person, and thereby introduce 
a new member. The value of a share in a joint stock is always the 
price which it will bring in the market; and this may be either 
greater or less, in any proportion, than the sum which its owner 
stands credited for in the stock of the company. 

Secondly, In a private copartnery, each partner is bound for the 
debts contracted by the company to the whole extent of his for- 
tune. In a joint stock company, on the contrary, each partner is 
bound only to the extent of his share.®^ 

The trade of a joint stock company is always managed by a 
court of directors. This court, indeed, is frequently subject, in many 
respects, to the controul of a general court of proprietors. But the 
greater part of those proprietors seldom pretend to understand any 
thing of the business of the company; and when the spirit of fac- 
tion happens not to prevail among them, give themselves no trouble 
about it, but receive contentedly such half yearly or yearly divi- 
dend, as the directors think proper to make to them. This total ex- 
emption from trouble and from risk, beyond a limited sum, en- 
courages many people to become adventurers in joint stock com- 
panies, who would, upon no account, hazard their fortunes in any 
private copartnery. Such companies, therefore, commonly draw to 

A joint-stock company here is an incorporated or chartered company. The 
common application of the term to other companies is later. 


Joint 
stock 
com- 
panies 
differ 
from pri- 
vate part- 
nerships: 

(i) with- 
drawals 
are by 
sale of 
shares; 


( 2 ) lia- 
bility is 
limited to 
the share 
held. 

Such 
com- 
panies are 
managed 
by direct- 
ors, who 
are negli- 
gent and 
profuse 



Some 
have and 
some 
have not 
exclusive 
privileges. 


The 

Royal 

African 

Company, 

having 

lost exclu- 


700 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

themselves much greater stocks than any private copartnery can 
boast of. The trading stock of the South Sea Company, at one time, 
amounted to upwards of thirty-three millions eight hundred thou- 
sand pounds.®'^ The dividend capital of the Bank of England 
amounts, at present, to ten millions seven hundred and eighty thou- 
sand pounds.^® The directors of such companies, however, being 
the managers rather of other people’s money than of their own, it 
cannot well be expected, that they should watch over it with the 
same anxious vigilance with which the partners in a private co- 
partnery frequently watch over their own. Like the stewards of a 
rich man, they are apt to consider attention to small matters as not 
for their master’s honour, and very easily give themselves a dispen- 
sation from having it. Negligence and profusion, therefore, must 
always prevail, more or less, in the management of the affairs of 
such a company. It is upon this account that joint stock companies 
for foreign trade have seldom been able to maintain the competi- 
tion against private adventurers. They have, accordingly, very sel- 
dom succeeded without an exclusive privilege; and frequently have 
not succeeded with one. Without an exclusive privilege they have 
commonly mismanaged the trade. With an exclusive privilege they 
have both mismanaged and confined it. 

The Royal African Company, the predecessors of the present 
African Company, had an exclusive privilege by charter; but as 
that charter had not been confirmed by act of parliament, the 
trade, in consequence of the declaration of rights, was, soon after 
the revolution, laid open to all his majesty’s subjects.®^ The Hud- 
son’s Bay Company are, as to their legal rights, in the same situa- 
tion as the Royal African Company.^® Their exclusive charter has 
not been confirmed by act of parliament. The South Sea Company, 
as long as they continued to be a trading company, had an exclu- 
sive privilege confirmed by act of parliament; as have likewise the 
present United Company of Merchants trading to the East In- 
dies. 

The Royal African Company soon found that they could not 
maintain the competition against private adventurers, whom, not- 
withstanding the declaration of rights, they continued for some 
time to call interlopers, and to persecute as such. In 1698, however, 
the private adventurers were subjected to a duty of ten per cent. 

Anderson, Commerce, ajd. 1723. 

®®It stood at this amount from 1746 to the end of 1781, but was then in- 
creased by a call of 8 per cent.— Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1746, and (Con- 
tinuation) A.D. 1781. 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1672 and a.d. 1698. ^Ihid., a.d. 1670. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 70i 

upon almost all the different branches of their trade, to be em- 
ployed by the company in the maintenance of their forts and gar- 
risons. But, notwithstanding this heavy tax, the company were 
still unable to maintain the competition,^^ Their stock and credit 
gradually declined. In 1712, their debts had become so great, that 
a particular act of parliament was thought necessary, both for their 
security and for that of their creditors. It was enacted, that the res- 
olution of two-thirds of these creditors in number and value, should 
bind the rest, both with regard to the time which should be allowed 
to the company for the payment of their debts; and with regard to 
any other agreement which it might be thought proper to make 
with them concerning those debts.*^^ In 1730, their affairs were in 
so great disorder, that they were altogether incapable of maintain- 
ing their forts and garrisons, the sole purpose and pretext of their 
institution. From that year, till their final dissolution, the parlia- 
ment judged it necessary to allow the annual sum of ten thousand 
pounds for that purpose.*^^ In 1732, after having been for many 
years losers by the trade of carrying negroes to the West Indies, 
they at last resolved to give it up altogether; to sell to the private 
traders to America the negroes which they purchased upon the 
coast; and to employ their servants in a trade to the inland parts of 
Africa for gold dust, elephants teeth, dying drugs, &c. But their 
success in this more confined trade was not greater than in their 
former extensive one.*^^ Their affairs continued to go gradually to 
decline, till at last, being in every respect a bankrupt company, 
they were dissolved by act of parliament, and their forts and gar- 
risons vested in the present regulated company of merchants trad- 
ing to Africa.’’^^ Before the erection of the Royal African Company, 
there had been three other joint stock companies successively es- 
tablished, one after another, for the African trade.*^^ They were all 
equally unsuccessful. They all, however, had exclusive charters, 
which, though not confirmed by act of parliament, were in those 
days supposed to convey a real exclusive privilege. 

The Hudson^s Bay Company, before their misfortunes in the late 
war, had been much more fortunate than the Royal African Com- 
pany. Their necessary expence is much smaller. The whole number 
of people whom they maintain in their different settlements and 

^Ibid., A.D. 1698. ™io Ann., c. 27. Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1712. 

A.D. 1730. The annual grant continued till 1746. 

■^"Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1733. 

”23 Geo. II., c. 31; 25 Geo. II., c. 40; Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1750, 
1752; above, p. 696, 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1618, 1631 and 1662. 


sive privi- 
leges, 
failed. 


The Hud- 
son’s Bay 
Company 
have been 
moderate- 



ly suc- 
cessful, 
having in 
fact an 
exclusive 
trade and 
a very 
small 
number 
of pro- 
prietors. 


702 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

habitations, which they have honoured with the name of forts, is 
said not to exceed a hundred and twenty persons This number, 
however, is sufficient to prepare beforehand the cargo of furs and 
other goods necessary for loading their ships, which, on account of 
the ice, can seldom remain above six or eight weeks in those seas. 
This advantage of having a cargo ready prepared, could not for sev- 
eral years be acquired by private adventurers, and without it there 
seems to be no possibility of trading to Hudson’s Bay. The mod- 
erate capital of the company, which, it is said, does not exceed one 
hundred and ten thousand pounds,^® may besides be sufficient to 
enable them to engross the whole, or almost the whole, trade and 
surplus produce of the miserable, though extensive country, com- 
prehended within their charter. No private adventurers, accord- 
ingly, have ever attempted to trade to that country in competition 
with them. This company, therefore, have always enjoyed an ex- 
clusive trade in fact, though they may have no right to it in law. 
Over and above all this, the moderate capital of this company is 
said to be divided among a very small number of proprietors.^^ But 
a joint stock company, consisting of a small number of proprietors, 
with a moderate capital, approaches very nearly to the nature of a 
private copartnery, and may be capable of nearly the same degree 
of vigilance and attention. It is not to be wondered at, therefore, if 
in consequence of these different advantages, the Hudson’s Bay 
Company had, before the late war, been able to carry on their 
trade with a considerable degree of success. It does not seem prob- 
able, however, that their profits ever approached to what the late 
Mr. Dobbs imagined them.'^® A much more sober and judicious 
writer, Mr. Anderson, author of The Historical and Chronological 
Deduction of Commerce, very justly observes, that upon examining 
the accounts which Mr. Dobbs himself has given for several years 
together, of their exports and imports, and upon making proper al- 
lowances for their extraordinary risk and expence, it does not ap- 
pear that their profits deserve to be envied, or that they can much, 
if at all, exceed the ordinary profits of trade.'^^ 

A.D. 1743, quoting Captam Christopher Middleton. 

™ Anderson, Commerce: a.d. 1670. 

"“Eight or nine private merchants do engross nine-tenth parts of the 
company’s stock.” Anderson, Commerce: ad. 1743, quoting from An Ac- 
count of the Countries Adjoining to Hudson's Bay . . . with an Abstract of 
Captain Middleton's Journal and Observations upon his Behaviour: by Ar- 
thur Dobbs, Esq., 1744, p. 58. 

“^^In his Account: PP* 3 and 58, he talks of 2,000 per cent., but this, of 
course, only refers to the difference between buying and selling prices. 

^ ’^Commerce: a.d. 1743, but the examination is not nearly so comprehen- 
sive, nor the expression of opinion so ample as is suggested by the text. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 703 

The South Sea Company never had any forts or garrisons to 
maintain, and therefore were entirely exempted from one great ex- 
pence, to which other joint stock companies for foreign trade are 
subject. But they had an immense capital dividend among an im- 
mense number of proprietors. It was naturally to be expected, 
therefore, that folly, negligence, and profusion should prevail in 
the whole management of their affairs. The knavery and extrava- 
gance of their stock-jobbing projects are sufficiently known, and 
the explication of them would be foreign to the present subject. 
Their mercantile projects were not much better conducted. The 
first trade which they engaged in was that of supplying the Spanish 
West Indies with negroes, of which (in consequence of what was 
called the Assiento contract granted them by the treaty of Utrecht) 
they had the exclusive privilege. But as it was not expected that 
much profit could be made by this trade, both the Portugueze and 
French companies, who had enjoyed it upon the same terms before 
them, having been ruined by it, they were allowed, as compensa- 
tion, to send annually a ship of a certain burden to trade directly 
to the Spanish West Indies.®*^ Of the ten voyages which this an- 
nual ship was allowed to make, they are said to have gained con- 
siderably by one, that of the Royal Caroline in 1731, and to have 
been losers, more or less, by almost all the rest. Their ill success 
was imputed, by their factors and agents, to the extortion and op- 
pression of the Spanish government; but was, perhaps, principally 
owing to the prolusion and depredations of those very factors and 
agents; some of whom are said to have acquired great fortunes even 
in one year. In 1734, the company petitioned the king, that they 
might be allowed to dispose of the trade and tunnage of their an- 
nual ship, on account of the little profit which they made by it, and 
to accept of such equivalent as they could obtain from the king pf 
Spain.^^ 

In 1724, this company had undertaken the whale-fishery. Of 
this, indeed, they had no monopoly; but as long as they carried it 
on, no other British subjects appear to have engaged in it. Of the 
eight voyages which their ships made to Greenland, they were 
gainers by one, and losers by all the rest. After their eighth and last 
voyage, when they had sold their ships, stores, and utensils, they 
found that their whole loss, upon this branch, capital and interest 
included, amounted to upwards of two hundred and thirty-seven 
thousand pounds.®^ 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1713 ^Ibid., a.d. 1731, 1732 and 1734 

^Ibid., A.D. 1724 and 1732. But there was no successful voyage; the com- 
pany were “considerable losers in every one” of the eight years. 


The 

South Sea 
Company 
failed to 
make any 
profit by 
their an- 
nual ship 
to the 
Spanish 
West 
Indies, 


lost 

£237,000 
in their 
whale 
fishery, 



and final- 
ly ceased 
to be a 
trading 
company. 


They had 
competi- 
tors in 
the trade 
of the 
annual 
ship. 


704 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

In 1722, this company petitioned the parliament to be allowed 
to divide their immense capital of more than thirty-three millions 
eight hundred thousand pounds, the whole of which had been lent 
to government, into two equal pants: The one half, or upwards of 
sixteen millions nine hundred thousand pounds, to be put upon the 
same footing with other government annuities, and not to be sub- 
ject to the debts contracted, or losses incurred, by the directors of 
the company, in the prosecution of their mercantile projects; the 
other half to remain, as before, a trading stock, and to be subject to 
those debts and losses. The petition was too reasonable not to be 
granted.®® In 1733, they again petitioned the parliament, that 
three-fourths of their trading stock might be turned into annuity 
stock, and only one-fourth remain as trading stock, or exposed to 
the hazards arising from the bad management of their directors.®^ 
Both their annuity and trading stocks had, by this time, been re- 
duced more than two millions each, by several different payments 
from government; so that this fourth amounted only to 3,662,784/. 
8^. 6rf.®® In 1748, all the demands of the company upon the king of 
Spain, in consequence of the Assiento contract, were, by the treaty 
of Aix-la-Chapelle, given up for what was supposed an equivalent. 
An end was put to their trade with the Spanish West Indies, the re- 
mainder of their trading stock was turned into an annuity stock, 
and the company ceased in every respect to be a trading com- 
pany.®® 

It ought to be observed, that in the trade which the South Sea 
Company carried on by means of their annual ship, the only trade 
by which it ever was expected that they could make any consider- 
able profit, they were not without competitors, either in the foreign 
or in the home market. At Carthagena, Porto Bello, and La Vera 
Cruz, they had to encounter the competition of the Spanish mer- 
chants, who brought from Cadiz, to those markets, European 
goods, of the same kind with the outward cargo of their ship; and 
in England they had to encounter that of the English merchants, 
who imported from Cadiz goods of the Spanish West Indies, of the 
same kind with the inward cargo. The goods both of the Spanish 
and English merchants, indeed, were, perhaps, subject to higher du- 
ties. But the loss occasioned by the negligence, profusion, and mal- 
versation of the servants of the company, had probably been a tax 
much heavier than all those duties. That a joint stock company 
should be able to carry on successfully any branch of foreign trade, 

9 Geo. L, c. 6. Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1723. 

®*This was done by 6 Geo. II., c. 28. Ihid., a.d. 1733. 

^ lhid,j A.D. 1732 and a.d. 1.733. a.d. 1748 and a.d. 1750. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 70S 

when private adventurers can come into any sort of open and fair 
competition with them, seems contrary to all experience. 

The old English East India Company was established in 1600, The old 
by a charter from Queen Elizabeth. In the first twelve voyages 
which they fitted out for India, they appear to have traded as a (^orn- 
regulated company, with separate stocks, though only in the gen- pany, un- 
eral ships of the company. In 1612, they united into a joint stock.®"^ support 
Their charter was exclusive, and though not confirmed by act of competi- 
parliament, was in those days supposed to convey a real exclusive 
privilege. For many years, therefore, they were not much disturbed 
by interlopers. Their capital which never exceeded seven hundred 
and forty-four thousand pounds,^^ and of which fifty pounds was 
a share,®® was not so exorbitant, nor their dealings so extensive, as 
to afford either a pretext for gross negligence and profusion, or a 
cover to gross malversation. Notwithstanding some extraordinary 
losses, occasioned partly by the malice of the Dutch East India 
Company, and partly by other accidents, they carried on for many 
years a successful trade. But in process of time, when the principles 
of liberty were better understood, it became every day more and 
more doubtful how far a royal charter, not confirmed by act of 
parliament, could convey an exclusive privilege. Upon this question 
the decisions of the courts of justice were not uniform, but varied 
with the authority of government and the humours of the times. 

Interlopers multiplied upon them; and towards the end of the reign 
of Charles 11 . through the whole of that of James II. and during 
a part of that of William III. reduced them to great distress.®® In 
1698, a proposal was made to parliament of advancing two mil- 
lions to government at eight per cent, provided the subscribers were 
erected into a new East India Company with exclusive privileges. 

The old East India Company offered seven hundred thousand 
pounds, nearly the amount of their capital, at four per cent, upon 
the same conditions. But such was at that time the state of public 
credit, that it was more convenient for government to borrow two 
millions at eight per cent, than seven hundred thousand pounds at 
four. The proposal of the new subscribers was accepted, and a new 
East India Company established in consequence. The old East In- was 
dia Company, however, had a right to continue their trade till 
1701. They had, at the same time, in the name of their treasurer, the pre- 

subscribed, very artfully, three hundred and fifteen thousand sent com- 
pany, 

^ “Until this time the English East India trade was carried on by several 
separate stocks, making particular running-voyages; but in this year they 
united all into one general joint-capital stock,” Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 

1612. 

^Ibid., A.D. 1693. ^Ibid., a.d. 1676. 


^Ibid,, A.D. 1681 and a.d. 1685. 



7o6 XHE wealth OF NATIONS 

pounds into the stock of the new. By a negligence in the expression 
of the act of parliament, which vested the East India trade in the 
subscribers to this loan of two millions, it did not appear evident 
that they were all obliged to unite into a joint stock.^^ A few pri- 
vate traders, whose subscriptions amounted only to seven thou- 
sand two hundred pounds, insisted upon the privilege of trading 
separately upon their own stocks and at their own risk.®^ The old 
East India Company had a right to a separate trade upon their old 
stock till 1701; and they had likewise, both before and after that 
period, a right, like that of other private traders, to a separate 
trade upon the three hundred and fifteen thousand pounds, which 
they ‘had subscribed into the stock of the new company. The com- 
petition of the two companies with the private traders, and with 
one another, is said to have well nigh ruined both. Upon a subse- 
quent occasion, in 1730, when a proposal was made to parliament 
for putting the trade under the management of a regulated com- 
pany, and thereby laying it in some measure open, the East India 
Company, in opposition to this proposal, represented in very strong 
terms, what had been, at this time, the miserable effeicts, as they 
thought them, of this competition. In India, they said, it raised the 
price of goods so high, that they were not worth the buying; and 
in England, by overstocking the market, it sunk their price so low, 
that no profit could be made by them.^^ That by a more plentiful 
supply, to the great advantage and conveniency of the public, it 
must have reduced, very much, the price of India goods in the Eng- 
lish market, cannot well be doubted; but that it should have raised 
very much their price in the India market, seems not very probable, 
as all the extraordinary demand which that competition could oc- 
casion, must have been but as a drop of water in the immense 
ocean of Indian commerce. The increase of demand, besides, 
though in the beginning it may sometimes raise the price of goods, 
never fails to lower it in the long run. It encourages production, and 
thereby increases the competition of the producers, who, in order 
to undersell one another, have recourse to new divisions of labour 
and new improvements of art, which might never otherwise have 
been thought of. The miserable effects of which the company com- 
plained, were the cheapness of consumption and the encouragement 
given to production, precisely the two effects which it is the great 
business of political oeconomy to promote. The competition, how- 
ever, of which they gave this doleful account, had not been allowed 
to be of long continuance. In 1702, the two companies, were, in 

®^The whole of this history is in Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1698. 

Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1701. a.d. 1730. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 7^7 

some measure, united by an indenture tripartite, to which the 
queen was the third party; and in 1708, they were, by act of par- 
liament, perfectly consolidated into one company by their pres- 
ent name of the United Company of Merchants trading to the East 
Indies. Into this act it was thought worth while to insert a clause, 
allowing the separate traders to continue their trade till Michael- 
mas 1 71 1, but at the same time empowering the directors, upon 
three years notice, to redeem their little capital of seven thousand 
two hundred pounds, and thereby to convert the whole stock of the 
company into a joint stock. By the same act, the capital of the 
company, in consequence of a new loan to government, was aug- 
mented from two millions to three millions two hundred thousand 
pounds.®^ In 1743, the company advanced another million to gov- 
ernment. But this million being raised, not by a call upon the pro- 
prietors, but by selling annuities and contracting bond-debts, it 
did not augment the stock upon which the proprietors could claim 
a dividend. It augmented, however, their trading stock, it being 
equally liable with the other three millions two hundred thousand 
pounds to the losses sustained, and debts contracted, by the com- 
pany in prosecution of their mercantile projects. From 1708, or at 
least from 1711, this company, being delivered from all competi- 
tors, and fully established in the monopoly of the English com- 
merce to the East Indies, carried on a successful trade, and from 
their profits made annually a moderate dividend to their proprie- 
tors. During the French war which began in 1741, the ambition of 
Mr. Dupleix, the French governor of Pondicherry, involved them in 
the wars of the Carnatic, and in the politics of the Indian princes. 
After many signal successes, and equally signal losses, they at last 
lost Madras, at that time their principal settlement in India. It was 
restored to them by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle; and about this 
time the spirit of war and conquest seems to have taken possession 
of their servants in India, and never since to have left them. During 
the French war which began in 1755, their arms partook of the 
general good fortune of those of Great Britain. They defended 
Madras, took Pondicherry, recovered Calcutta, and acquired the 
revenues of a rich and extensive territory, amounting, it was then 
said, to upwards of three millions a-year. They remained for sev- 
eral years in quiet possession of this revenue: But in 1767, adminis- 
tration laid claim to their territorial acquisitions, and the revenue 

®^“This coalition was made on the 22nd of July, 1702, by an indenture 
tripartite between the Queen and the said two companies.’ “Anderson, 
Commerce^ a.d. 1702. 

Ann., c. 17. Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1708. 


which 
with ex- 
clusive 
privileges 
has trad- 
ed suc- 
cessfully, 

but has 
con- 
quered 
large ter- 
ritories, 



7o8 the wealth OF NATIONS 

arising from them, as of right belonging to the crown; and the 
company, in compensation for this claim, agreed to pay to govern- 
ment four hundred thousand pounds a-year. They had before this 
gradually augmented their dividend from about six to ten per 
cent.; that is, upon their capital of three millions two hundred 
thousand pounds, they had increased it by a hundred and twenty- 
eight thousand pounds, or had raised it from one hundred and 
ninety-two thousand, to three hundred and twenty thousand 
pounds a-year. They were attempting about this time to raise it 
still further, to twelve and a half per cent, which would have made 
their annual payments to their proprietors equal to what they had 
agreed to pay annually to government, or to four hundred thou- 
sand pounds a-year. But during the two years in which their agree- 
ment with government was to take place, they were restrained from 
any further increase of dividend by two successive acts of parlia- 
ment,®® of which the object was to enable them to make a speedier 
progress in the payment of their debts, which were at this time esti- 
mated at upwards of six or seven millions sterling. In 1769, they 
renewed their agreement with government for five years more, and 
stipulated, that during the course of that period they should be al- 
lowed gradually to increase their dividend to twelve and a half per 
cent.; never increasing it, however, more than one per cent, in one 
year. This increase of dividend, therefore, when it had risen to its 
utmost height, could augment their annual payments, to their pro- 
prietors and government together, but by six hundred and eight 
thousand pounds, beyond what they had been before their late ter- 
ritorial acquisitions. What the gross revenue of those territorial ac- 
quisitions was supposed to amount to, has already been mentioned; 
and by an account brought by the Cruttenden East Indiaman in 
1768, the nett revenue, clear of all deductions and military charges, 
was stated at two millions forty-eight thousand seven hundred and 
forty-seven pounds. They were said at the same time to possess an- 
other revenue, arising partly from lands, but chiefly from the cus- 
toms established at their different settlements, amounting to four 
hundred and thirty-nine thousand pounds. The profits of their 
trade too, according to the evidence of their chairman before the 
House of Commons, amounted at this time to at least four hundred 
thousand pounds a-year; according to that of their accomptant, to 
at least five hundred thousand; according to the lowest account, at 
least equal to the highest dividend that was to be paid to their pro- 
prietors. So great a revenue might certainly have afforded an aug- 
mentation of six hundred and eight thousand pounds in their an- 
7 Geo. III., c. 49, and 8 Geo. III., c. ii. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 709 

nual payments; and at the same time have a large sinking fund suf- 
ficient for the speedy reduction of their debts. In 1773, however, 
their debts, instead of being reduced, were augmented by an arrear 
to the treasury in the pa5mient of the four hundred thousand 
pounds, by another to the custom-house for duties unpaid, by a 
large debt to the bank for money borrowed, and by a fourth for 
bills drawn upon them from India, and wantonly accepted, to the 
amount of upwards of twelve hundred thousand pounds. The dis- 
tress which these accumulated claims brought upon them, obliged 
them not only to reduce all at once their dividend to six per cent, 
but to throw themselves upon the mercy of government, and to 
supplicate, first, a release from the further pa5nnent of the stipu- 
lated four hundred thousand pounds a-year; and, secondly, a loan 
of fourteen hundred thousand, to save them from immediate bank- 
ruptcy. The great increase of their fortune had, it seems, only 
served to furnish their servants with a pretext for greater profusion, 
and a cover for greater malversation, than in proportion even to 
that increase of fortune. The conduct of their servants in India, and 
the general state of their affairs both in India and in Europe, be- 
came the subject of a parliamentary inquiry; in consequence of 
which several very important alterations were made in the constitu- 
tion of their government, both at home and abroad. In India their 
principal settlements of Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta, which had 
before been altogether independent of one another, were subjected 
to a governor-general, assisted by a council of four assessors, par- 
liament assuming to itself the first nomination of this governor and 
council who were to reside at Calcutta; that city having now be- 
come, what Madras was before, the most important of the English 
settlements in India. The court of the mayor of Calcutta, originally 
instituted for the trial of mercantile causes, which arose in the city 
and neighbourhood, had gradually extended its jurisdiction with 
the extension of the empire. It was now reduced and confined to 
the original purpose of its institution. Instead of it a new supreme 
court of judicature was established, consisting of a chief justice and 
three judges to be appointed by the crown. In Europe, the qualifica- 
tion necessary to entitle a proprietor to vote at their general courts 
was raised, from five hundred pounds, the original price of a share 
in the stock of the company, to a thousand pounds. In order to 
vote upon this qualification too, it was declared necessary that he 
should have possessed it, if acquired by his own purchase, and not 
by inheritance, for at least one year, instead of six months, the term 
requisite before. The court of twenty-four directors had before been 

In 1772-3. Additions and Corrections and ed. 3 read “subjects.” 


and mis- 
managed 
them, 


so that 
Parlia- 
ment has 
been 
obliged 
to make 
altera- 
tions, 



710 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

chosen annually; but it was now enacted that each director should, 
for the future, be chosen for four years; six of them, however, to 
go out of office by rotation every year, and not to be capable of be- 
ing re-chosen at the election of the six new directors for the ensu- 
ing year.®® In consequence of these alterations, the courts, both of 
the proprietors and directors, it was expected, would be likely to 
act with more dignity and steadiness than they had usually done 
before. But it seems impossible, by any alterations, to render those 
courts, in any respect, fit to govern, or even to share in the govern- 
ment of a great empire; because the greater part of their members 
must alwa3?’s have too little interest in the prosperity of that em- 
pire, to give any serious attention to what may promote it. Fre- 
quently a man of great, sometimes even a man of small fortune, is 
willing to purchase a thousand pounds share in India stock, merely 
for the influence which he expects to acquire by a vote in the court 
of proprietors. It gives him a share, though not in the plunder, yet 
in the appointment of the plunderers of India; the court of direc- 
tors, though they make that appointment, being necessarily more 
or less under the influence of the proprietors, who not only elect 
those directors, but sometimes overrule the appointments of their 
servants in India. Provided he can enjoy this influence for a few 
years, and thereby provide for a certain number of his friends, he 
frequently cares little about the dividend; or even about the value 
of the stock upon which his vote is founded. About the prosperity 
of the great empire, in the government of which that vote gives him 
a share, he seldom cares at all. No other sovereigns ever were, or, 
from the nature of things, ever could be, so perfectly indifferent 
about the happiness or misery of their subjects, the improvement or 
waste of their dominions, the glory or disgrace of their administra- 
tion; as, from irresistible moral causes, the greater part of the pro- 
prietors of such a mercantile company are, and necessarily must be. 
This indifference too was more likely to be increased than dimin- 
ished by some of the new regulations which were made in conse- 
quence of the parliamentary inquiry. By a resolution of the House 
of Commons, for example, it was declared, that when the fourteen 
hundred thousand pounds lent to the company by government 
should be paid, and their bond-debts be reduced to fifteen hundred 
thousand pounds, they might then, and not till then, divide eight 
per cent, upon their capital ; and that whatever remained of their 
revenues and neat profits at home, should be divided into four 
parts; three of them to be paid into the exchequer for the use of the 
public, and the fourth to be reserved as a fund, either for the further 

*^^13 Geo. III., c. 63. 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 7 ir 

reduction of their bond-debts, or for the discharge of other contin- 
gent exigencies, which the company might labour under.®® But if 
the company were bad stewards, and bad sovereigns, when the 
whole of their nett revenue and profits belonged to themselves, 
and were at their own disposal, they were surely not likely to be 
better, when three-fourths of them were to belong to other people, 
and the other fourth, though to be laid out for the benefit of the 
company, yet to be so, under the inspection, and with the approba- 
tion, of other people. 

It might be more agreeable to the company that their own ser- 
vants and dependants should have either the pleasure of wasting, or 
the profit of embezzling whatever surplus might remain, after pay- 
ing the proposed dividend of eight per cent., than that it should 
come into the hands of a set of people with whom those resolutions 
could scarce fail to set them, in some measure, at variance. The in- 
terest of those servants and dependants might so far predominate in 
the court of proprietors, as sometimes to dispose it to support the 
authors of depredations which had been committed in direct viola- 
tion of its own authority. With the majority of proprietors, the sup- 
port even of the authority of their own court might sometimes be a 
matter of less consequence, than the support of those who had set 
that authority at defiance. 

The regulations of 1773, accordingly, did not put an end to the 
disorders of the company’s government in India. Notwithstanding 
that, during a momentary fit of good conduct, they had at one time 
collected, into the treasury of Calcutta, more than three millions 
sterling; notwithstanding that they had afterwards extended, either 
their dominion, or their depredations over a vast accession of some 
of the richest and most fertile countries in India; all was wasted 
and destroyed. They found themselves altogether unprepared to 
stop or resist the incursion of Hyder Ali; and, in consequence of 
those disorders, the company is now (1784) in greater distress than 
ever; and, in order to prevent immediate bankruptcy, is once more 
reduced to supplicate the assistance of government. Different plans 
have been proposed by the different parties in parliament, for the 
better management of its affairs. And all those plans seem to agree 
in supposing, what was indeed always abundantly evident, that it 
is altogether unfit to govern its territorial possessions. Even the 
company itself seems to be convinced of its own incapacity so far, 

House of Commons Journals, April 27, 1773. 

^°®The spelling in other parts of the work is “neat.” The Additions and 
Corrections read “nett” both here and five lines above. The discrepancy was 
obviously noticed in one case and not in the other. 


which are 
not likely 
to be of 
service. 


They tend 
to en- 
courage 
waste, 


and the 

company 

is now in 

greater 

distress 

than 

ever. 



Com- 
panies 
misuse the 
right of 
making 
peace and 
war. 


The grant 
of a tem- 
porary 
monopoly 
to a 
joint 
stock 
com- 
pany may 
sometimes 
be rea- 
sonable, 
but a per- 
petual 
monopoly 
creates an 
absurd 
tax. 


712 the wealth of nations 

and seems, upon that account, willing to give them up to govern- 
ment. 

With the right of possessing forts and garrisons in distant and 
barbarous countries, is necessarily connected the right of making 
peace and war in those countries. The joint stock companies which 
have had the one right, have constantly exercised the other, and 
have frequently had it expressly conferred upon them. How unjust- 
ly, how capriciously, how cruelly they have commonly exercised it, 
is too well known from recent experience. 

When a company of merchants undertake, at their own risk and 
expence, to establish a new trade with some remote and barbarous 
nation, it may not be unreasonable to incorporate them into a joint 
stock company, and to grant them, in case of their success, a mo- 
nopoly of the trade for a certain number of years. It is the easiest 
and most natural way in which the state can recompense them for 
hazarding a dangerous and expensive experiment, of which the pub- 
lic is afterwards to reap the benefit. A temporary monopoly of this 
kind may be vindicated upon the same principles upon which a like 
monopoly of a new machine is granted to its inventor, and that of a 
new book to its author. But upon the expiration of the term, the 
monopoly ought certainly to determine; the forts and garrisons, if 
it was found necessary to establish any, to be taken into the hands 
of government, their value to be paid to the company, and the trade 
to be laid open to all the subjects of the state. By a perpetual mo- 
nopoly, all the other subjects of the state are taxed very absurdly 
in two different ways; first, by the high price of goods, which, in the 
case of a free trade, they could buy much cheaper; and, secondly, 
by their total exclusion from a branch of business, which it might 
be both convenient and profitable for many of them to carry on. It 
is for the most worthless of all purposes too that they are taxed in 
this manner. It is merely to enable the company to support the neg- 
ligence, profusion, and malversation of their own servants, whose 
disorderly conduct seldom allows the dividend of the company to 
exceed the ordinary rate of profit in trades which are altogether 
free, and very frequently makes it fall even a good deal short of that 
rate. Without a monopoly, however, a joint stock company, it 
would appear from experience, cannot long carry on any branch of 
foreign trade. To buy in one market, in order to sell, with profit, in 
another, when there are many competitors in both; to watch over, 
not only the occasional variations in the demand, but the much 
greater and more frequent variations in the competition, or in the 
supply which that demand is likely to get from other people, and to 
suit with dexterity and judgment both the quantity and quality of 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 7 i 3 

each assortment of goods to all these circumstances, is a species of 
warfare of which the operations are continually changing, and 
which can scarce ever be conducted successfully, without such an 
unremitting exertion of vigilance and attention, as cannot long be 
expected from the directors of a joint stock company. The East In- 
dia Company, upon the redemption of their funds, and the expira- 
tion of their exclusive privilege, have a right, by act of parliament, 
to continue a corporation with a joint stock, and to trade in their 
corporate capacity to the East Indies in common with the rest of 
their fellow-subjects. But in this situation, the superior vigilance 
and attention of private adventurers would, in all probability, soon 
make them weary of the trade. 

An eminent French author, of great knowledge in matters of po- 
litical (economy, the Abbe Morellet, gives a list of fifty-five joint 
stock companies for foreign trade, which have been established in 
different parts of Europe since the year 1600, and which, according 
to him, have all failed from mismanagement, notwithstanding they 
had exclusive privileges.^^^ He has been misinformed with regard to 
the history of two or three of them, which were not joint stock com- 
panies and have not failed. But, in compensation, there have been 
several joint stock companies which have failed, and which he has 
omitted. 

The only trades which it seems possible for a joint stock company 
to carry on successfully, without an exclusive privilege, are those, of 
which all the (derations are capable of being reduced to what is 
called a routine, or to such a uniformity of method as admits of 
little or no variation. Of this kind is, first, the banking trade; sec- 
ondly, the trade of insurance from fire, and from sea risk and cap- 
ture in time of war; thirdly, the trade of making and maintaining a 
navigable cut or canal; and, fourthly, the similar trade of bringing 
water for the supply of a great city. 

Though the principles of the banking trade may appear some- 
what abstruse, the practice is capable of being reduced to strict 
rules. To depart upon any occasion from those rules, in consequence 
of some flattering speculation of extraordinary gain, is almost al- 
ways extremely dangerous, and frequently fatal to the banking 
company which attempts it. But the constitution of joint stock 
companies renders them in general more tenacious of established 
rules than any private copartnery. Such companies, therefore, seem 
extremely well fitted for this trade. The principal banking compa- 

^^^Examen de la reponse de M* [Necker] an Memoire de M, VAhhe 
Morellet, sur la Compagnie des Indes: par V auteur du Mimoire, 1769) PP* 
35-38. 


A list of 
fifty-five 
com- 
panies 
with e\- 
clusive 
privileges 
for 

foreign 

trade 

which 

have 

failed has 
been col- 
lected by 
Abbe 
Morellet 

Only four 
trades 
can be 
well Gai- 
ned on 
by a com- 
pany with 
no exclu- 
sive privi- 
lege, 
namely, 

banking, 



insurance, 


canal and 
aqueduct 
manage- 
ment and 
construc- 
tion. 


A joint 
stock 
company 
ought not 
to be 
estab- 
lished 
except for 
some pur- 
pose of 
remark- 
able util- 
ity, re- 
quiring a 
larger 
capital 
than can 
be pro- 
vided by 
a private 
partner- 
ship. 


714 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

nies in Europe, accordingly, are joint stock companies, many of 
which manage their trade very successfully without any exclusive 
privilege. The Bank of England has no other exclusive privilege, ex- 
cept that no other banking company in England shall consist of 
more than six persons.^®- The two banks of Edinburgh are joint 
stock companies without any exclusive privilege. 

The value of the risk, either from fire, or from loss by sea, or by 
capture, though it cannot, perhaps, be calculated very exactly, ad- 
mits, however, of such a gross estimation as renders it, in some de- 
gree, reducible to strict rule and method. The trade of insurance, 
therefore, may be carried on successfully by a joint stock company, 
without any exclusive privilege. Neither the London Assurance, nor 
the Royal Exchange Assurance companies, have any such pri- 
vilege.^®^ 

When a navigable cut or canal has been once made, the manage- 
ment of it becomes quite simple and easy, and is reducible to 
strict rule and method. Even the making of it is so, as it may be 
contracted for with undertakers at so much a mile, and so much a 
lock. The same thing may be said of a canal, an aqueduct, or a great 
pipe for bringing water to supply a great city. Such undertakings, 
therefore, may be, and accordingly frequently are, very successfully 
managed by joint stock companies wthout any exclusive privilege. 

To establish a joint stock company, however, for any undertak- 
ing, merely because such a company might be capable of managing 
it successfully; or to exempt a particular set of dealers from some 
of the general laws which take place with regard to all their neigh- 
bours, merely because they might be capable of thriving if they had 
such an exemption, would certainly not be reasonable. To render 
such an establishment perfectly reasonable, with the circumstance 
of being reducible to strict rule and method, two other circum- 
stances ought to concur. First, it ought to appear with the clearest 
evidence, that the undertaking is of greater and more general util- 
ity than the greater part of common trades; and secondly, that it 
requires a greater capital than can easily be collected into a private 
copartnery. If a moderate capital were sufficient, the great util- 
ity of the undertaking would not be a sufficient reason for estab- 
lishing a joint stock company; because, in this case, the demand 
for what it was to produce, would readily and easily be supplied by 

Ann., c. 22. 

^^At least as against private persons, Anderson, Commerce, aj). 1720. 

Eds. 4 and 5 insert “it” here, by a misprint. 

Additions and Corrections and ed. 3 read “was.” 



PARTICULAR BRANCHES OF COMMERCE 7^5 

private adventurers. In the four trades above mentioned, both those 
circumstances concur. 

The great and general utility of the banking trade when pru- These 
dently managed, has been fully explained in the second book of this are 
inquiry But a public bank which is to support public credit, and fulfilled 
upon particular emergencies to advance to government the whole by bank- 
produce of a tax, to the amount, perhaps, of several millions, a year 
or two before it comes in, requires a greater capital than can easily 
be collected into any private copartnery. 

The trade of insurance,gives great security to the fortunes of pri- insurance, 
vate people, and by dividing among a great many that loss which 
would ruin an individual, makes it fall light and easy upon the 
whole society. In order to give this security, however, it is necessary 
that the insurers should have a very large capital. Before the estab- 
lishment of the two joint stock companies for insurance in London, 
a list, it is said, was laid before the attorney-general, of one hundred 
and fifty private insurers who had failed in the course of a few 
years. 

That navigable cuts and canals, and the works which are some- canals 
times necessary for supplying a great city with water, are of great 
and general utility; while at the same time they frequently require 
a greater expence than suits the fortunes of private people, is suf- 
ficiently obvious. 

Except the four trades above mentioned, I have not been able to but not 
recollect any other in which all the three circumstances, requisite 
for rendering reasonable the establishment of a joint stock com- 
pany, concur. The English copper company of London, the lead 
smelting company, the glass grinding company, have not even the 
pretext of any great or singular utility in the object which they pur- 
sue; nor does the pursuit of that object seem to require any ex- 
pence unsuitable to the fortunes of many private men. Whether the 
trade which those companies carry on, is reducible to such strict 
rule and method as to render it fit for the management of a joint 
stock company, or whether they have any reason to boast of their 
extraordinary profits, I do not pretend to know. The mine-adven- 
turers company has been long ago bankrupt.^®’' A share in the stock 
of the British Linen Company of Edinburgh sells, at present, very 
much below par, though less so than it did some years ago. The 
joint stock companies, which are established for the public-spirited 
purpose of promoting some particular manufacture, over and above 


Above, pp. 277-284. 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1690, 1704, 1710, 1711. 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


71G 

managing their own affairs ill, to the diminution of the general stock 
of the society, can in other respects scarce ever fail to do more harm 
than good. Notwithstanding the most upright intentions, the un- 
avoidable partiality of their directors to particular branches of the 
manufacture, of which the undertakers mislead and impose upon 
them, is a real discouragement to the rest, and necessarily breaks, 
more or less, that natural proportion which would otherwise estab- 
lish itself between judicious industry and profit, and which, to the 
general industry of the country, is of all encouragements the great- 
est and the most effectual.^®® 


Article II 


Institu- 
tions for 
education 
may also 
be made 
to furnish 
their own 
expense, 

or may 
be en- 
dowed. 


Have en- 
dowments 
really 
promoted 
useful 
educa- 
tion? 


Of the Expence of the Institutions for the Education of Youth 

The institutions for the education of the youth may, in the same 
manner, furnish a revenue sufficient for defraying their own ex- 
pence. The fee or honorary which the scholar pays to the master 
naturally constitutes a revenue of this kind. 

Even where the reward of the master does not arise altogether 
from this natural revenue, it still is not necessary that it should be 
derived from that general revenue of the society, of which the col- 
lection and application are,^^® in most countries, assigned to the 
executive power. Through the greater part of Europe, accordingly, 
the endowment of schools and colleges makes either no charge upon 
that general revenue, or but a very small one. It every where arises 
chiefly from some local or provincial revenue, from the rent of 
some landed estate, or from the interest of some sum of money al- 
lotted and put under the management of trustees for this particular 
purpose, sometimes by the sovereign himself, and sometimes by 
some private donor. 

Have those public endowments contributed in general to pro- 
mote the end of their institution? Have they contributed to en- 
courage the diligence, and to improve the abilities of the teachers? 
Have they directed the course of education towards objects more 
useful, both to the individual and to the public, than those to which 
it would naturally have gone of its own accord? It should not seem 
very difficult to give at least a probable answer to each of those 
questions. 

^°® This section, beginning on p. 690, appears first in Additions and Cor- 
rections and ed. 3. 

To SI* ^ in the first line of the text. 

'“Eds. 1-4 read “is.” 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 71 ? 

In every profession, the exertion of the greater part of those who 
exercise it, is always in proportion to the necessity they are under 
of making that exertion. This necessity is greatest with those to 
whom the emoluments of their profession are the only source from 
which they expect their fortune, or even their ordinary revenue and 
subsistence. In order to acquire this fortune, or even to get this 
subsistence, they must, in the course of a year,^^^ execute a certain 
quantity of work of a known value; and, where the competition is 
free, the rivalship of competitors, who are all endeavouring to jus- 
tie one another out of employment, obliges every man to endeavour 
to execute his work with a certain degree of exactness. The great- 
ness of the objects which are to be acquired by success in some 
particular professions may, no doubt, sometimes animate the exer- 
tion of a few men of extraordinary spirit and ambition. Great ob- 
jects, however, are evidently not necessary in order to occasion the 
greatest exertions. Rivalship and emulation render excellency, even 
in mean professions, an object of ambition, and frequently occa- 
sion the very greatest exertions. Great objects, on the contrary, 
alone and unsupported by the necessity of application, have seldom 
been sufficient to occasion any considerable exertion. In England, 
success in the profession of the law leads to some very great ob- 
jects of ambition; and yet how few men, born to easy fortunes, 
have ever in this country been eminent in that profession? 

The endowments of schools and colleges have necessarily dimin- 
ished more or less the necessity of application in the teachers. Their 
subsistence, so far as it arises from their salaries, is evidently de- 
rived from a fund altogether independent of their success and rep- 
utation in their particular professions. 

. In some universities the salary makes but a part, and frequently 
but a small part of the emoluments of the teacher, of which the 
greater part arises from the honoraries or fees of his pupils. The 
necessity of application, though always more or less diminished, is 
not in this case entirely taken away.^^^ Reputation in his profession 
is still of some importance to him, and he still has some dependency 
upon the affection, gratitude, and favourable report of those who 
have attended upon his instructions; and these favourable senti- 
ments he is likely to gain in no way so well as by deserving them, 
that is, by the abilities and diligence with which he discharges ev- 
ery part of his duty. 

In other universities the teacher is prohibited from receiving any 

^Ed. I reads “the year.” 

^Rae, Life of Adam Smithy p. 48, thinks Smith’s salary at Glasgow may 
have been about £70 with a house, and his fees near £100. 


Exertion 
is always 
in pro- 
portion 
to its 
necessity. 


Endow- 

ments 

diminiRh 

the neces- 
sity of 
applica- 
tion, 

which is 
not en- 
tirely re- 
moved 
where the 
teacher 
receives 
part of 
his 

emolu- 
ments 
from fees, 



but is en- 
tirely ab- 
sent when 
his whole 
revenue 
arises 
from en- 
dow- 
ments. 


Members 
of a col- 
lege or 
university 
are in- 
dulgent 
to their 
fellow 
members. 


External 
control is 
ignorant 
and capri- 
cious. 


718 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

honorary or fee from his pupils, and his salary constitutes the whole 
of the revenue which he derives from his office. His interest is, in 
this case, set as directly in opposition to his duty as it is possible to 
set it. It is the interest of every man to live as much at his ease as 
he can; and if his emoluments are to be precisely the same, whether 
he does, or does not perform some very laborious duty, it is certain- 
ly his interest, at least as interest is vulgarly understood, either to 
neglect it altogether, or, if he is subject to some authority which 
will not suffer him to do this, to perform it in as careless and slov- 
enly a manner as that authority will permit. If he is naturally ac- 
tive and a lover of labour, it is his interest to employ that activity 
in any way, from which he can derive some advantage, rather than 
in the performance of his duty, from which he can derive none. 

If the authority to which he is subject resides in the body cor- 
porate, the college, or university, of which he himself is a member, 
and in which the greater part of the other members are, like him- 
self, persons who either are, or ought to be teachers; they are likely 
to make a common cause, to be all very indulgent to one another, 
and every man to consent that his neighbour may neglect his duty, 
provided he himself is allowed to neglect his own. In the university 
of Oxford, the greater part of the public professors have, for these 
many years, given up altogether even the pretence of teaching. 

If the authority to which he is subject resides, not so much in the 
body corporate of which he is a member, as in some other extrane- 
ous persons, in the bishop of the diocese for example; in the gov- 
ernor of the province; or, perhaps, in some minister of state; it is 
not indeed in this case very likely that he will be suffered to neglect 
his duty altogether. All that such superiors, however, can force him 
to do, is to attend upon his pupils a certain number of hours, th^t 
is, to give a certain number of lectures in the week or in the year. 
What those lectures shall be, must still depend upon the diligence 
of the teacher; and that diligence is likely to be proportioned to the 
motives which he has for exerting it. An extraneous jurisdiction of 
this kind, besides, is liable to be exercised both ignorantly and ca- 
priciously. In its nature it is arbitrary and discretionary, and the 
persons who exercise it, neither attending upon the lectures of the 
teacher themselves, nor perhaps understanding the sciences which 
it is his business to teach, are seldom capable of exercising it with 
judgment. From the insolence of office too they are frequently in- 
different how they exercise it, and are very apt to censure or de- 
prive him of his office wantonly, and without any just cause. The 
person subject to such jurisdiction is necessarily degraded by it, 
and, instead of being one of the most respectable, is rendered one of 



719 


EDUCATION OF YOUTH 

the meanest and most contemptible persons in the society. It is by 
powerful protection only that he can effectually guard himself 
against the bad usage to which he is at all times exposed; and this 
protection he is most likely to gain, not by ability or diligence in 
his profession, but by obsequiousness to the will of his superiors, 
and by being ready, at all times, to sacrifice to that will the rights, 
the interest, and the honour of the body corporate of which he is a 
member. Whoever has attended for any considerable time to the 
administration of a French university, must have had occasion to 
remark the effects which naturally result from an arbitrary and ex- 
traneous jurisdiction of this kind. 

Whatever forces a certain number of students to any college or 
university, independent of the merit or reputation of the teachers, 
tends more or less to diminish the necessity of that merit or repu- 
tation. 

The privileges of graduates in arts, in law, physic and divin- 
ity, when they can be obtained only by residing a certain number 
of years in certain universities, necessarily force a certain number 
of students to such universities, independent of the merit or repu- 
tation of the teachers. The privileges of graduates are a sort of 
statutes of apprenticeship, which have contributed to the improve- 
ment of education, just as the^^^ other statutes of apprenticeship 
have to that of arts and manufactures. 

The charitable foundations of scholarships, exhibitions, bursa- 
ries, &c. necessarily attach a certain number of students to certain 
colleges, independent altogether of the merit of those particular 
colleges. Were the students upon such charitable foundations left 
free to chuse what college they liked best, such liberty might per- 
haps contribute to excite some emulation among different colleges. 
A regulation, on the contrary, which prohibited even the independ- 
ent members of every particular college from leaving it, and going 
to any other, without leave first asked and obtained of that which 
they meant to abandon, would tend very much to extinguish that 
emulation. 

If in each college the tutor or teacher, who was to instruct each 
student in all arts and sciences, should not be voluntarily chosen by 
the student, but appointed by the head of the college; and if, in 
case of neglect, inability, or bad usage, the student should not be 
allowed to change him for another, without leave first asked and 
obtained; such a regulation would not only tend very much to ex- 
tinguish all emulation among the different tutors of the same col- 
lege, but to diminish very much in all of them the necessity of dili- 

“®Eds. I and 2 read “in physic.” ^‘Ed. i does not contain “the.” 


To com- 
pel young 
men to 
attend a 
univer- 
sity has a 
bad ef- 
fect on 
the 

teachers. 

The privi- 
leges of 
gradu- 
ates are 
thus like 
appren- 
ticeship. 

Scholar- 

ships, 


regula- 

tions 

against 

migra- 

tion, 

and as- 
signment 
of stu- 
dents to 
particular 
tutors are 
equally 
perni- 
cious. 



Where 
such 
regula- 
tions pre- 
vail a 
teacher 
may 
avoid or 
suppress 
all visible 
signs of 
dikppro- 
bation on 
the part 
of his 
pupils. 


Univer- 
sity and 
college 
discipline 
is con- 
trived for 
the ease 
of the 
teachers, 
and quite 
unneces- 
sary if the 
teachers 
are toler- 
ably dili- 
gent. 


720 the wealth of nations 

gence and of attention to their respective pupils. Such teachers, 
though very well paid by their students, might be as much disposed 
to neglect them, as those who are not paid by them at all, or who 
have no other recompence but their salary. 

If the teacher happens to be a man of sense, it must be an un- 
pleasant thing to him to be conscious, while he is lecturing his stu- 
dents, that he is either speaking or reading nonsense, or what is 
very little better than nonsense. It must too be unpleasant to him 
to observe that the greater part of his students desert his lectures; 
or perhaps attend upon them with plain enough marks of neglect, 
contempt, and derision. If he is obliged, therefore, to give a certain 
number of lectures, these motives alone, without any other inter- 
est, might dispose him to take some pains to give tolerably good 
ones. Several different expedients, however may be fallen upon, 
which will effectually blunt the edge of all those incitements to dil- 
igence. The teacher, instead of explaining to his pupils himself the 
science in which he proposes to instruct them, may read some book 
upon it; and if this book is written in a foreign and dead language, 
by interpreting it to them into their own; or, what would give him 
still less trouble, by making them interpret it to him, and by now 
and then making an occasional remark upon it, he may flatter him- 
self that he is giving a lecture. The slightest degree of knowledge 
and application will enable him to do this, without exposing him- 
self to contempt or derision, or saying any thing th^-t is really fool- 
ish, absurd, or ridiculous. The discipline of the college, at the same 
time, may enable him to force all his pupils to the most regular at- 
tendance upon this sham-lecture, and to maintain the most decent 
and respectful behaviour during the whole time of the perform- 
ance. 

The discipline of colleges and universities is in general contrived, 
not for the benefit of the students, but for the interest, or more 
properly speaking, for the ease of the masters. Its object is, in all 
cases, to maintain the authority of the master, and whether he neg- 
lects or performs his duty, to oblige the students in all cases to be- 
have to him as if he performed it with the greatest diligence and 
ability. It seems to presume perfect wisdom and virtue in the one 
order, and the greatest weakness and folly in the other. Where the 
masters, however, really perform their duty, there are no examples, 
I believe, that the greater part of the students ever neglect theirs. 
No discipline is ever requisite to force attendance upon lectures 
which are really worth the attending, as is well known wherever 
any such lectures are given. Force and restraint may, no doubt, be 
in some degree requisite in order to oblige children, or very young 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 721 

boys, to attend to those parts of education which it is thought nec- 
essary for them to acquire during that early period of life; but 
after twelve or thirteen years of age, provided the master does his 
duty, force or restraint can scarce ever be necessary to carry on any 
part of education. Such is the generosity of the greater part of 
young men, that, so far from being disposed to neglect or despise 
the instructions of their master, provided he shows some serious 
intention of being of use to them, they are generally inclined to 
pardon a great deal of incorrectness in the performance of his duty, 
and sometimes even to conceal from the public a good deal of gross 
negligence. 

Those parts of education, it is to be observed, for the teaching of 
which there are no public institutions, are generally the best taught. 
When a young man goes to a fencing or a dancing school, he does 
not indeed always learn to fence or to dance very well; but he sel- 
dom fails of learning to fence or to dance. The good effects of the 
riding school are not commonly so evident. The expence of a riding 
school is so great, that in most places it is a public institution. The 
three most essential parts of literary education, to read, write, and 
account, it still continues to be more common to acquire in private 
than in public schools; and it very seldom happens that any body 
fails of acquiring them to the degree m which it is necessary to ac- 
quire them. 

In England the public schools are much less corrupted than the 
universities. In the schools the youth are taught, or at least may be 
taught, Greek and Latm; that is, every thing which the masters 
pretend to teach, or which, it is expected they should teach. In the 
universities the youth neither are taught, nor always can find any 
proper means of being taught, the sciences, which it is the business 
of those incorporated bodies to teach. The reward of the school- 
master in most cases depends principally, in some cases almost en- 
tirely, upon the fees or honoraries of his scholars. Schools have no 
exclusive privileges. In order to obtain the honours of graduation, 
it is not necessary that a person should bring a certificate of his 
having studied a certain number of years at a public school. If up- 
on examination he appears to understand what is taught there, no 
questions are asked about the place where he learnt it. 

The parts of education which are commonly taught in universi- 
ties, it may, perhaps, be said are not very well taught. But had it 
not been for those institutions they would not have been commonly 
taught at all, and both the individual and the public would have 
suffered a good deal from the want of those important parts of ed- 
ucation. 


I he parts 
of educa- 
tion that 
are not 
conducted 
by public 
institu- 
tions are 
better 
taught. 


English 
public 
schools, 
where the 
teachers 
depend 
more 
upon fees, 
are less 
corrupt 
than the 
universi- 
ties. 


What the 
universi- 
ties teach 
badly 
would 
not be 
common- 
ly taught 



at all but 
for them. 

They 

were 

originally 

instituted 

for the 

education 

of 

church- 
men in 
theology ; 


for this 

Latin 

was 

necessary, 


but not 
Greek or 
Hebrew, 
which 
were in- 
troduced 
by the 
Reforma- 
tion. 


722 the wealth of nations 

The present universities of Europe were originally, the greater 
part of them, ecclesiastical corporations; instituted for the educa- 
tion of churchmen. They were founded by the authority of the 
pope, and were so entirely under his immediate protection, that 
their members, whether masters or students, had all of them what 
was then called the benefit of clergy, that is, were exempted from 
the civil jurisdiction of the countries in which their respective uni- 
versities were situated, and were amenable only to the ecclesiastical 
tribunals. What was taught in the greater part of those universities 
was suitable to the end of their institution, either theology, or 
something that was merely preparatory to theology. 

When Christianity was first established by law, a corrupted Latin 
had become the common language of all the western parts of Eu- 
rope. The service of the church accordingly, and the translation of 
the Bible which was read in churches, were both in that corrupted 
Latin; that is, in the common language of the country. After the 
irruption of the barbarous nations who overturned the Roman em- 
pire, Latin gradually ceased to be the language of any part of Eu- 
rope. But the reverence of the people naturally preserves the es- 
tablished forms and ceremonies of religion, long after the circum- 
stances which first introduced and rendered them reasonable are no 
more. Though Latin, therefore, was no longer understood any 
where by the great body of the people, the whole service of the 
church still continued to be performed in that language. Two dif- 
ferent languages were thus established in Europe, in the same man- 
ner as in ancient Egypt; a language of the priests, and a language 
of the people; a sacred and a profane; a learned and an unlearned 
language. But it was necessary that the priests should understand 
something of that sacred and learned language in which they were 
to officiate; and the study of the Latin language therefore made, 
from the beginning, an essential part of university education. 

It was not so with that either of the Greek, or of the Hebrew 
language. The infallible decrees of the church had pronounced the 
Latin translation of the Bible, commonly called the Latin Vulgate, 
to have been equally dictated by divine inspiration, and therefore 
of equal authority with the Greek and Hebrew originals. The 
knowledge of those two languages, therefore, not being indispen- 
sably requisite to a churchman, the study of them did not for a long 
time make a necessary part of the common course of university ed- 
ucation. There are some Spanish universities, I am assured, in 
which the study of the Greek language has never yet made any part 
of that course. The first reformers found the Greek text of the new 
testament, and even the Hebrew text of the old, more favourable 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 7^3 

to their opinions, than the vulgate translation, which, as might 
naturally be supposed, had been gradually accommodated to sup- 
port the doctrines of the catholic church. They set themselves, 
therefore, to expose the many errors of that translation, which the 
Roman catholic clergy were thus put under the necessity of defend- 
ing or explaining. But this could not well be done without some 
knowledge of the original languages, of which the study was there- 
fore gradually introduced into the greater part of universities; both 
of those which embraced, and of those which rejected, the doctrines 
of the reformation. The Greek language was connected with every 
part of that classical learning, which, though at first principally 
cultivated by catholics and Italians, happened to come into fashion 
much about the same time that the doctrines of the reformation 
were set on foot. In the greater part of universities, therefore, that 
language was taught previous to the study of philosophy, and as 
soon as the student had made some progress in the Latin. The He- 
brew language having no connection with classical learning, and, 
except the holy scriptures, being the language of not a single book 
in any esteem, the study of it did not commonly commence till after 
that of philosophy, and when the student had entered upon the 
study of theology. 

Originally the first rudiments both of the Greek and Latin lan- 
guages were taught in universities, and in some universities they 
still continue to be so.^^^ In others it is expected that the student 
should have previously acquired at least the rudiments of one or 
both of those languages, of which the study continues to make ev- 
ery where a very considerable part of university education. 

The ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three great 
branches; physics, or natural philosophy; ethics, or moral philos- 
ophy; and logic. This general division seems perfectly agreeable to 
the nature of things. 

The great phenomena of nature, the revolutions of the heavenly 
bodies, eclipses, comets; thunder, lightning, and other extraordi- 
nary meteors; the generation, the life, growth, and dissolution of 
plants and animals; are objects which, as they necessarily excite 
the wonder, so they naturally call forth the curiosity, of man- 
kind to enquire into their causes. Superstition first attempted to 
satisfy this curiosity, by referring all those wonderful appearances 
to the immediate agency of the gods. Philosophy afterwards en- 
deavoured to account for them, from more familiar causes, or from 
such as mankind were better acquainted with, than the agency of 

Ed. I reads “and they still continue to be so in some univer'^itie^ ” 

“Necessarily” and “naturally” are transposed in ed. i. 


Greek 
and Latin 
continue 
to be a 
consider- 
able part 
of uni- 
versity 
education. 

There are 

three 

branches 

of Greek 

philoso- 

phy, 

(i)phys- 

icsor 

natural 

philoso- 

phy, 



(2) ethics 
or moral 
philoso- 
phy, 


and (3) 
logic. 


724 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the gods. As those great phenomena are the first objects of human 
curiosity, so the science which pretends to explain them must nat- 
urally have been the first branch of philosophy that was cultivated. 
The first philosophers, accordingly, of whom history has preserved 
any account, appear to have been natural philosophers. 

In every age and country of the world men must have attended 
to the characters, designs, and actions of one another, and many 
reputable rules and maxims for the conduct of human life, must 
have been laid down and approved of by common consent. As soon 
as writing came into fashion, wise men, or those who fancied them- 
selves such, would naturally endeavour to increase the number of 
those established and respected maxims, and to express their own 
sense of what was either proper or improper conduct, sometimes in 
the more artificial form of apologues, like what are called the fables 
of uEsop; and sometimes in the more simple one of apophthegms, 
or wise sayings, like the Proverbs of Solomon, the verses of Theog- 
nis and Phocyllides, and some part of the works of Hesiod. They 
might continue in this manner for a long time merely to multiply 
the number of those maxims of prudence and morality, without 
even attempting to arrange them in any very distinct or methodi- 
cal order, much less to connect them together by one or more gen- 
eral principles, from which they were all deducible, like effects 
from their natural causes. The beauty of a systematical arrange- 
ment of different observations connected by a few common princi- 
ples, was first seen in the rude essays of those ancient times towards 
a system of natural philosophy. Something of the same kind was 
afterwards attempted in morals. The maxims of common life were 
arranged in some methodical order, and connected together by a 
few common principles, in the same manner as they had attempted 
to arrange and connect the phenomena of nature. The science which 
pretends to investigate and explain those connecting principles, is 
what is properly called moral philosophy. 

Different authors gave different systems both of natural and 
moral philosophy. But the arguments by which they supported 
those different systems, far from being always demonstrations, 
were frequently at best but very slender probabilities, and some- 
times mere sophisms, which had no other foundation but the inac- 
curacy and ambiguity of common language. Speculative systems 
have in all ages of the world been adopted for reasons too frivolous 
to have determined the judgment of any man of common sense, in 
a matter of the smallest pecuniary interest. Gross sophistry has 
scarce ever had any influence upon the opinions of mankind, ex- 
cept in matters of philosophy and speculation; and in these it has 



EDUCATION OE YOUTH 


7-5 


frequently had the greatest. The patrons of each system of natural 
and moral philosophy naturally endeavoured to expose the weak- 
ness of the arguments adduced to support the systems which were 
opposite to their own. In examining those arguments, they were 
necessarily led to consider the difference between a probable and a 
demonstrative argument, between a fallacious and a conclusive 
one; and Logic, or the science of the general principles of good and 
bad reasoning, necessarily arose out of the observations which a 
scrutiny of this kind gave occasion to. Though in its origin, poste- 
rior both to physics and to ethics, it was commonly taught, not in- 
deed in all, but in the greater part of the ancient schools of philos- 
ophy, previously to either of those sciences. The student, it seems 
to have been thought, ought to understand well the difference be- 
tween good and bad reasoning, before he was led to reason upon 
subjects of so great importance. 

This ancient division of philosophy into three parts was in the 
greater part of the universities of Europe, changed for another into 
five. 

In the ancient philosophy, whatever was taught concerning the 
nature either of the human mind or of the Deity, made a part of 
the system of physics. Those beings, in whatever their essence 
might be supposed to consist, were parts of the great system of the 
universe, and parts too productive of the most important effects. 
Whatever human reason could either conclude, or conjecture, con- 
cerning them, made, as it were, two chapters, though no doubt two 
very important ones, of the science which pretended to give an ac- 
count of the origin and revolutions of the great system of the uni- 
verse. But in the universities of Europe, where philosophy was 
taught only as subservient to theology, it was natural to dwell 
longer upon these two chapters than upon any other of the sci- 
ence. They were gradually more and more extended, and were 
divided into many inferior chapters, till at last the doctrine of spir- 
its, of which so little can be known, came to take up as much room 
in the system of philosophy as the doctrine of bodies, of which so 
much can be known. The doctrines concerning those two subjects 
were considered as making two distinct sciences. What are called 
Metaphysics or Pneumatics were set in opposition to Physics, and 
were cultivated not only as the more sublime, but, for the pur- 
poses of a particular profession, as the more useful science of the 
two. The proper subject of experiment and observation, a subject 

Ed. I reads “those.” ^ Ed. i reads “Those two chapters were.” 

Ed. I reads, “What was called Metaphysics or Pneumatics was set in 
opposition to Physics, and was cultivated.” 


Philoso- 
phy was 
after- 
wards di- 
vided 
into five 
branches, 

Meta- 
physics 
or pneu- 
matics 
were add- 
ed to 
physics, 



and gave 
rise to 
Ontology’. 


Moral 
philoso- 
phy de- 
generated 
into casu- 
istry and 
an ascetic 
morality, 


the order 
being (i) 
logic, (2) 
ontology, 

(3) Pneu- 
matology, 

(4) a de- 
based 
moral 
philoso- 


726 the wealth of nations 

in which a careful attention is capable of making so many useful 
discoveries, was almost entirely neglected. The subject in which, 
after a few very simple and almost obvious truths, the most care- 
ful attention can discover nothing but obscurity and uncertainty, 
and can consequently produce nothing but subtleties and sophisms, 
was greatly cultivated. 

When those two sciences had thus been set in opposition to one 
another, the comparison between them naturally gave birth to a 
third, to what was called Ontology, or the science which treated of 
the qualities and attributes which were common to both the sub- 
jects of the other two sciences. But if subtleties and sophisms com- 
posed the greater part of the Metaphysics or Pneumatics of the 
schools, they composed the whole of this cobweb science of Ontol- 
ogy, which was likewise sometimes called Metaphysics. 

Wherein consisted the happiness and perfection of a man, consid- 
ered not only as an individual, but as the member of a family, of a 
state, and of the great society of mankind, was the object which the 
ancient moral philosophy proposed to investigate. In that philos- 
ophy the duties of human life were treated of as subservient to the 
happiness and perfection of human life. But when moral, as well as 
natural philosophy, came to be taught only as subservient to the- 
ology, the duties of human life were treated of as chiefly subservient 
to the happiness of a life to come. In the ancient philosophy the 
perfection of virtue was represented as necessarily productive, to 
the person who possessed it, of the most perfect happiness in this 
life. In the modern philosophy it was frequently represented as gen- 
erally, or rather as almost always inconsistent with any degree of 
happiness in this life ; and heaven was to be earned only by penance 
and mortification, by the austerities and abasement of a monk; not 
by the liberal, generous, and spirited conduct of a man. Casuistry 
and an ascetic morality made up, in most cases, the greater part of 
the moral philosophy of the schools. By far the most important of 
all the different branches of philosophy, became in this manner by 
far the most corrupted. 

Such, therefore, was the common course of philosophical educa- 
tion in the greater part of the universities in Europe. Logic was 
taught first: Ontology came in the second place: Pneumatology, 
comprehending the doctrine concerning the nature of the human 
soul and of the Deity, in the third: In the fourth followed a debased 
system of moral philosophy, which was considered as immediately 
connected with the doctrines of Pneumatology, with the immortal- 
ity of the human soul, and with the rewards and punishments which, 
^Ed. I reads “of.” 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH m 

from the justice of the Deity, were to be expected in a life to come: 
A short and superficial system of Physics usually concluded the 
course. 

The alterations which the universities of Europe thus introduced 
into the ancient course of philosophy, were all meant for the educa- 
tion of ecclesiastics, and to render it a more proper introduction to 
the study of theology. But the additional quantity of subtlety and 
sophistry; the casuistry and the ascetic morality which those alter- 
ations introduced into it, certainly did not render it more proper 
for the education of gentlemen or men of the world, or more likely 
either to improve the understanding, or to mend the heart. 

This course of philosophy is what still continues to be taught in 
the greater part of the universities of Europe; with more or less dili- 
gence, according as the constitution of each particular university 
happens to render diligence more or less necessary to the teachers. 
In some of the richest and best endowed universities, the tutors con- 
tent themselves with teaching a few unconnected shreds and parcels 
of this corrupted course; and even these they commonly teach very 
negligently and superficially. 

The improvements which, in modern times, have been made in 
several different branches of philosophy, have not, the greater part 
of them, been made in universities; though some no doubt have. 
The greater part of universities have not even been very forward to 
adopt those improvements, after they were made; and several of 
those learned societies have chosen to remain, for a long time, the 
sanctuaries in which exploded systems and obsolete prejudices 
found shelter and protection, after they had been hunted out of 
every other corner of the world. In general, the richest and best en- 
dowed universities have been tl;e slowest in adopting those improve- 
ments, and the most averse to permit any considerable change in 
the established plan of education. Those improvements were more 
easily introduced into some of the poorer universities, in which the 
teachers, depending upon their reputation for the greater part of 
their subsistence, were obliged to pay more attention to the current 
opinions of the world.^^^ 

But though the public schools and universities of Europe were 
originally intended only for the education of a particular profes- 
sion, that of churchmen; and though they were not always very 
diligent in instructing their pupils even in the sciences which were 
supposed necessary for that profession, yet they gradually drew to 
themselves the education of almost all other people, particularly of 
almost all gentlemen and men of fortune. No better method, it 

“^Above^ p. 717. 


phy, (5) 

physics. 


Univei- 
sity edu- 
cation 
was thus 
made less 
likely to 
produce 
men of 
the 

world. 

This 
course is 
still 

taught in 
most uni- 
versities 
with more 
or less 
diligence. 


Few im- 
prove- 
ments in 
philoso- 
phy havfr 
been 
made by 
univer- 
sities, and 
fewest by 
the rich- 
est uni- 
versities 


In spite 
of all this 
the uni- 
versities 
drew to 
them- 
selves the 
education 
of gentle- 



men and 
men of 
fortune, 


but in 
England 
it is be- 
coming 
more 
usual to 
send 
young 
men to 
travel 
abroad, a 
plan so 
absurd 
that no- 
thing but 
the ds- 
credit of 
the uni- 
versities 
could 
have 
brought 
it into 
repute. 


In Greece 
the state 
directed 
education 
in gym- 
nastics 


728 the wealth of nations 

seems, could be fallen upon of spending, with any advantage, the 
long interval between infancy and that period of life at which men 
begin to apply in good earnest to the real business of the world, the 
business which is to employ them during the remainder of their 
days. The greater part of what is taught in schools and universi- 
ties, however, does not seem to be the most proper preparation for 
that business. 

In England, it becomes every day more and more the custom to 
send young people to travel in foreign countries immediately upon 
their leaving school, and without sending them to any university. 
Our young people, it is said, generally return home much improved 
by their travels. A young man who goes abroad at seventeen or 
eighteen, and returns home at one and twenty, returns three or four 
years older than he was when he went abroad; and at that age it is 
very difficult not to improve a good deal in three or four years. In 
the course of his travels, he generally acquires some knowledge of 
one or two foreign languages; a knowledge, however, which is sel- 
dom sufficient to enable him either to speak or write them with pro- 
priety. In other respects, he commonly returns home more con- 
ceited, more unprincipled, more dissipated, and more incapable of 
any serious application either to study or to business, than he could 
well have become in so short a time, had he lived at home. By 
travelling so very young, by spending in the most frivolous dissipa- 
tion the most precious years of his life, at a distance from the in- 
spection and controul of his parents and relations, every useful hab- 
it, which the earlier parts of his education might have had some ten- 
dency to form in him, instead of being rivetted and confirmed, is 
almost necessarily either weakened or effaced. Nothing but the dis- 
credit into which the universities are allowing themselves to fall, 
could ever have brought into repute so very absurd a practice as 
that of travelling at this early period of life. By sending his son 
abroad, a father delivers himself, at least for some time, from so 
disagreeable an object as that of a son unemployed, neglected, and 
going to ruin before his eyes. 

Such have been the effects of some of the modern institutions for 
education. 

Different plans and different institutions for education seem to 
have taken place in other ages and nations. 

In the republics of ancient Greece, every free citizen was in- 
structed, under the direction of the public magistrate, in gymnastic 
exercises and in music. By gymnastic exercises it was intended to 
harden his body, to sharpen his courage, and to prepare him for the 
fatigues and dangers of war; and as the Greek militia was, by all 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 729 

accounts, one of the best that ever was in the world, this part of 
their public education must have answered completely the purpose 
for which it was intended. By the other part, music, it was proposed, 
at least by the philosophers and historians who have given us an 
account of those institutions, to humanize the mind, to soften the 
temper, and to dispose it for performing all the social and moral 
duties both of public and private life. 

In ancient Rome the exercises of the Campus Martius answered 
the same purpose as those of the Gymnazium in ancient Greece,^-- 
and they seem to have answered it equally well. But among the 
Romans there was nothing which corresponded to the musical edu- 
cation of the Greeks. The morals of the Romans, however, both in 
private and public life, seem to have been, not only equal, but, upon 
the whole, a good deal superior to those of the Greeks. That they 
were superior in private life, we have the express testimony of Poly- 
bius and of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, two authors well ac- 
quainted with both nations; and the whole tenor of the Greek and 
Roman history bears witness to the superiority of the public morals 
of the Romans. The good temper and moderation of contending fac- 
tions seems to be the most essential circumstance in the public mor- 
als of a free people. But the factions of the Greeks were almost al- 
ways violent and sanguinary; whereas, till the time of the Gracchi, 
no blood had ever been shed in any Roman faction; and from the 
time of the Gracchi the Roman republic may be considered as in 
reality dissolved. Notwithstanding, therefore, the very respectable 
authority of Plato,^^® Aristotle, and Polybius, and notwith- 
standing the very ingenious reasons by which Mr. Montesquieu en- 
deavours to support that authority, it seems probable that the 
musical education of the Greeks had no great effect in mending their 
morals, since, without any such education, those of the Romans 
were upon the whole superior. The respect of those ancient sages for 
the institutions of their ancestors, had probably disposed them to 
find much political wisdom in what was, perhaps, merely an ancient 
custom, continued, without interruption, from the earliest period of 
those societies, to the times in which they had arrived at a consider- 
able degree of refinement. Music and dancing are the great amuse- 
ments of almost all barbarous nations, and the great accomplish- 
ments which are supposed to fit any man for entertaining his so- 
ciety. It is so at this day among the negroes on the coast of Africa. 

^ Repeated all but verbatim from above, p. 658. 

vi., $6; xviii., 34. Ant. Rom., ii,, xxiv. to xxvii., esp. xxvi. 

Repub., iii., 400-401. Politics, 1340 a. ^ Hist, iv., 20. 

^Esprit des lots, liv. iv., chap, viii, where Plato, Aristotle and Polybius 
are quoted. 


and 

music. 


The 

Romans 
had the 
Campus 
Martius, 
resem- 
lingthe 
gymna- 
sium, but 
no music. 
They 
were none 
the worse 
for its 
absence. 



730 


The 

teachers 
of mili- 
tary exer- 
cises and 
music 
were not 
paid or 
appointed 
by the 
state. 


Reading, 
writing 
and arith- 
metic 
were 
taught 
privately. 


Philo- 
sophical 
educa- 
tion was 
indepen- 
dent of 
the state. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

It was so among the ancient Celtes, among the ancient Scandinav- 
ians, and, as we may learn from Homer, among the ancient Greeks 
in the times preceding the Trojan war.^-^ When the Greek tribes 
had formed themselves into little republics, it was natural that the 
study of those accomplishments should, for a long time, make a part 
of the public and common education of the people. 

The masters who instructed the young people either in music or 
in military exercises, do not seem to have been paid, or even ap- 
pointed by the state, either in Rome or even in Athens, the Greek 
republic of whose laws and customs we are the best informed. The 
state required that every free citizen should fit himself for defend- 
ing it in war, and should, upon that account, learn his military ex- 
ercises. But it left him to learn them of such masters as he could 
find, and it seems to have advanced nothing for this purpose, but a 
public field or place of exercise, in which he should practise and 
perform them. 

In the early ages both of the Greek and Roman republics, the 
other parts of education seem to have consisted in learning to read, 
write, and account according to the arithmetic of the times. These 
accomplishments the richer citizens seem frequently to have ac- 
quired at home, by the assistance of some domestic pedagogue, who 
was generally, either a slave, or a freed-man; and the poorer citi- 
zens, in the schools of such masters as made a trade of teaching for 
hire. Such parts of education, however, were abandoned altogether 
to the care of the parents or guardians of each individual. It does 
not appear that the state ever assumed any inspection or direction 
of them. By a law of Solon, indeed, the children were acquitted from 
maintaining those parents in their old age,^®^ who had neglected to 
instruct them in some profitable trade or business.^®^ 

In the progress of refinement, when philosophy and rhetoric came 
into fashion, the better sort of people used to send their children to 
the schools of philosophers and rhetoricians, in order to be in- 
structed in these fashionable sciences. But those schools were not 
supported by the public. They were for a long time barely tolerated 
by it. The demand for philosophy and rhetoric was for a long time 
so small, that the first professed teachers of either could not find 
constant employment in any one city, but were obliged to travel 
about from place to place. In this manner lived Zeno of Elea, Pro- 
tagoras, Gorgias, Hippias, and many others. As the demand in- 

Iliad, xiii., 137; xviii, 494, 594; Odyssey, i., 152; viiL, 265; xviii., 304; 
xxiii, 134. 

Ed. I places “those parents” here. 

Plutarch, Life of Solon, quoted by Montesquieu, Esprit des Lois, liv., 
xxvi., ch. V. 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 73^ 

creased, the schools both of philosophy and rhetoric became sta- 
tionary; first in Athens, and afterwards in several other cities. The 
state, however, seems never to have encouraged them further than 
by assigning to some of them a particular place to teach in, which 
was sometimes done too by private donors. The state seems to have 
assigned the Academy to Plato, the Lyceum to Aristotle, and the 
Portico to Zeno of Citta, the founder of the Stoics. But Epicurus be- 
queathed his gardens to his own school. Till about the time of Mar- 
cus Antoninus, however, no teacher appears to have had any salary 
from the public, or to have had any other emoluments, but what 
arose from the honoraries or fees of his scholars. The bounty which 
that philosophical emperor, as we learn from Lucian, bestowed 
upon one of the teachers of philosophy, probably lasted no long- 
er than his own life. There was nothing equivalent to the privileges 
of graduation, and to have attended any of those schools was not 
necessary, in order to be permitted to practise any particular trade 
or profession. If the opinion of their own utility could not draw 
scholars to them, the law neither forced any body to go to them, nor 
rewarded any body for having gone to them. The teachers had no 
jurisdiction over their pupils, nor any other authority besides that 
natural authority, which superior virtue and abilities never fail to 
procure from young people towards those who are entrusted with 
any part of their education. 

At Rome, the study of the civil law made a part of the education, 
not of the greater part of the citizens, but of some particular fam- 
ilies. The young people, however, who wished to acquire knowledge 
in the law, had no public school to go to, and had no other method 
of studying it, than by frequenting the company of such of their re- 
lations and friends, as were supposed to understand it. It is perhaps 
worth while to remark, that though the laws of the twelve tables 
were, many of them, copied from those of some ancient Greek re- 
publics, yet law never seems to have grown up to be a science in any 
republic of ancient Greece. In Rome it became a science very early, 
and gave a considerable degree of illustration to those citizens who 
had the reputation of understanding it. In the republics of ancient 
Greece, particularly in Athens, the ordinary courts of justice con- 
sisted of numerous, and therefore disorderly, bodies of people, who 
frequently decided alfnost at random, or as clamour, faction and 
party spirit happened to determine. The ignominy of an unjust de- 
cision, when it was to be divided among five hundred, a thousand, 

^'^^The words “one of” do not occur in eds. i and 2 . They are perhaps a 
misprint for “some of” or a misreading suggested by a failure to understand 
that “his own life” is that of Marcus Antoninus. See Lucian, Emuchus, iii. 


No public 
institu- 
tions for 
teaching 
law exist- 
ed at 
Rome, 
where law 
was first 
developed 
into an 
orderly 
system. 



732 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


The an- 
cient 
system 
was more 
successful 
than the 
modern, 
which 
corrupts 
public 
teaching 
and 
stifles 
private. 


or fifteen hundred people (for son^e of their courts were so very nu- 
merous), could not fall very heavy upon any individual. At Rome, 
on the contrary, the principal courts of justice consisted either of a 
single judge, or of a small number of judges, whose characters, es- 
pecially as they deliberated always in public, could not fail to be 
very much affected by any rash or unjust decision. In doubtful 
cases, such courts, from their anxiety to avoid blame, would nat- 
urally endeavour to shelter themselves under the example, or pre- 
cedent, of the judges who had sat before them, either in the same, or 
in some other court. This attention to practice and precedent, nec- 
essarily formed the Roman law into that regular and orderly system 
in which it has been delivered down to us; and the like attention has 
had the like effects upon the laws of every other country where such 
attention has taken place. The superiority of character in the Ro- 
mans over that of the Greeks, so much remarked by Polybius and 
Dionysius of Halicarnassus,^^^ was probably more owing to the bet- 
ter constitution of their courts of justice, than to any of the circum- 
stances to which those authors ascribe it. The Romans are said to 
have been particularly distinguished for their superior respect to an 
oath. But the people who were accustomed to make oath only before 
some diligent and well-informed court of justice, would naturally 
be much more attentive to what they swore, than they who were ac- 
customed to do the same thing before mobbish and disorderly as- 
semblies. 

The abilities, both civil and military, of the Greeks and Romans, 
will readily be allowed to have been, at least, equal to those of any 
modern nation. Our prejudice is perhaps rather to overrate them. 
But except in what related to military exercises, the state seems to 
have been at no pains to form those great abilities: for I cannot be 
induced to believe, that the musical education of the Greeks could 
be of much consequence in forming them. Masters, however, had 
been found, it seems, for mstructing the better sort of people among 
those nations in every art and science in which the circumstances of 
their society rendered it necessary or convenient for them to be in- 
structed. The demand for such instruction produced, what it always 
produces, the talent for giving it; and the emulation which an un- 
restrained competition never fails to excite, appears to have brought 
that talent to a very high degree of perfection. In the attention 
which the ancient philosophers excited, in the empire which they 
acquired over the opinions and principles of their auditors, in the 
faculty which they possessed of giving a certain tone and character 
to the conduct and conversation of those auditors; they appear to 

Above, p. 729. 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 733 

have been much superior lo any modern teachers. In modern times, 
the diligence of public teachers is more or less corrupted by the cir- 
cumstances, which render them more or less independent of their 
success and reputation in their particular professions. Their salaries 
too put the private teacher, who would pretend to come into com- 
petition with them, in the same state with a merchant who attempts 
to trade without a bounty, in competition with those who trade with 
a considerable one. If he sells his goods at nearly the same price, he 
cannot have the same profit, and poverty and beggary at least, if 
not bankruptcy and ruin will infallibly be his lot. If he attempts to 
sell them much dearer, he is likely to have so few customers that his 
circumstances will not be much mended. The privileges of gradua- 
tion, besides, are in many countries necessary, or at least extremely 
convenient to most men of learned professions; that is, to the far 
greater part of those who have occasion for a learned education. But 
those privileges can be obtained only by attending the lectures of 
the public teachers. The most careful attendance upon the ablest 
instructions of any private teacher, cannot always give any title to 
demand them. It is from these different causes that the private 
teacher of any of the sciences which are commonly taught in uni- 
versities, is in modern times generally considered as in the very low- 
est order of men of letters. A man of real abilities can scarce find 
out a more humiliating or a more unprofitable employment to turn 
them to. The endowments of schools and colleges have, in this man- 
ner, not only corrupted the diligence of public teachers, but have 
rendered it almost impossible to have any good private ones. 

Were there no public institutions for education, no S5^tem, no if there 

science would be taught for which there was not some demand; or were no 
which the circumstances of the times did not render it either nec- stitutos 
essary, or convenient, or at least fashionable, to learn. A private for educa- 
teacher could never find his account in teaching, either an exploded 
and antiquated system of a science acknowledged to be useful, or a except 
science universally believed to be a mere useless and pedantic heap what was 
of sophistry and nonsense. Such systems, such sciences, can sub- 
sist no where, but in those incorporated societies for education taught, 
whose prosperity and revenue are in a great measure independent 
of their reputation, and altogether independent of their industry. 

Were there no public institutions for education, a gentleman, after 
going through, with application and abilities, the most complete 
course of education which the circumstances of the times were sup- 
posed to afford, could not come into the world completely ignorant 
of every thing which is the common subject of conversation among 
gentlemen and men of the world. 



Women’s 
education 
is e'^cel- 
knt in 
conse- 
quence of 
the ab- 
sence of 
public in- 
stitutions 


Ought 
the state 
to give 
no at- 
tention to 
educa- 
tion? 

In some 
cases it 
ought, in 
others it 
need not 


Division 
of labour 
destroys 
intellec- 
tual, so- 
cial and 
martial 
virtues 
unless 
govern- 
ment 
takes 
pains to 
prevent it, 


734 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

There are no public institutions for the education of women, and 
there is accordingly nothing useless, absurd, or fantastical in the 
common course of* their education. They are taught what their 
parents or guardians judge it necessary or useful for them to learn; 
and they are taught nothing else. Every part of their education 
tends evidently to some useful purpose; either to improve the natu- 
ral attractions of their person, or to form their mind to reserve, to 
modesty, to chastity, and to (economy; to render them both likely 
to become the mistresses of a family, and to behave properly when 
they have become such. In every part of her life a woman feels 
some conveniency or advantage from every part of her education. 
It seldom happens that a man, in an^ part of his life, derives any 
conveniency or advantage from some of the most laborious and 
troublesome parts of his education. 

Ought the public, therefore, to give no attention, it may be 
asked, to the education of the people? Or if it ought to give any, 
what are the different parts of education which it ought to attend 
to in the different orders of the people? and in what manner ought 
it to attend to them? 

In some cases the state of the society necessarily places the great- 
er part of individuals in such situations as naturally form in them, 
without any attention of government, almost all the abilities ancl 
virtues which that state requires, or perhaps can admit of. In other 
cases the state of the society does not place the greater part of in- 
dividuals in such situations, and some attention of government is 
necessary in order to prevent the almost entire corruption and de- 
generacy of the great body of the people. 

In the progress of the division of labour, the employment of the 
far greater part of those who live by labour, that is, of the great 
body of the people, comes to be confined to a few very simple oper- 
ations, frequently to one or two. But the understandings of the 
greater part of men are necessarily formed by their ordinary em- 
ployments. The man whose whole life is spent in performing a few 
simple operations, of which the effects too are, perhaps, always the 
same, or very nearly the same, has no occasion to exert his under- 
standing, or to exercise his invention in finding out expedients for 
removing difficulties which never occur. He naturally loses, there- 
fore, the habit of such exertion, and generally becomes as stupid 
and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become. The 
torpor of his mind renders him, not only incapable of relishing or 
bearing a part in any rational conversation, but of conceiving any 
generous, noble, or tender sentiment, and consequently of forming 
any just judgment concerning many even of the ordinary duties of 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 735 

private life. Of the great and extensive interests of his country he 
is altogether incapable of judging; and unless very particular pains 
have been taken to render him otherwise, he is equally incapable 
of defending his country in war. The uniformity of his stationary 
life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind, and makes him re- 
gard with abhorrence the irregular, uncertain, and adventurous 
life of a soldier. It corrupts even the activity of his body, and ren- 
ders him incapable of exerting his strength with vigour and per- 
severance, in any oiher employment than that to which he has been 
bred. His dexterity at his own particular trade seems, in this man- 
ner, to be acquired at the expence of his intellectual, social, and 
martial virtues. But in every improved and civilized society this is 
the state into which the labouring poor, that is, the great body of 
the people, must necessarily fall, unless government takes some 
pains to prevent it. 

It is otherwise in the barbarous societies, as they are commonly 
called, of hunters, of shepherds, and even of husbandmen in that 
rude state of husbandry which precedes the improvement of manu- 
factures, and the extension of foreign commerce. In such societies 
the varied occupations of every man oblige every man to exert his 
capacity, and to invent expedients for removing difficulties which 
are continually occurring. Invention is kept alive, and the mind is 
not suffered to fall into that drowsy stupidity, which, in a civil- 
ized society, seems to benumb the understanding of almost all the 
inferior ranks of people. In those barbarous societies, as they are 
called, every man, it has already been observed, is a warrior. Every 
man too is in some measure a statesman, and can form a tolerable 
judgment concerning the interest of the society, and the conduct of 
those who govern it. How far their chiefs are good judges in peace, 
or good leaders in war, is obvious to the observation of almost every 
single man among them. In such a society indeed, no man can well 
acquire that improved and refined understanding, which a few men 
sometimes possess in a more civilized state. Though in a rude so- 
ciety there is a good deal of variety in the occupations of every in- 
dividual, there is not a great deal in those of the whole society. 
Every man does, or is capable of doing, almost every thing which 
any other man does, or is capable of doing. Every man has a con- 
siderable degree of knowledge, ingenuity, and invention; but scarce 
any man has a great degree. The degree, however, which is com- 
monly possessed, is generally sufficient for conducting the whole 
simple business of the society. In a civilized state, on the contrary, 
though there is little variety in the occupations of the greater part 

^ Ed. I reads “the mind:> ot men are not ” 


whereas 
in bar- 
barous 
societies 
those 
virtues 
are kept 
alive by 
constant 
necessity 



The edu- 
cation of 
the com- 
mon 

people re- 
quires 
attention 
from the 
state 

more than 
that of 
people of 
rank and 
fortune, 
whose 
parents 
can look 
after their 
interests, 
and who 
spend 
tidr lives 
in varied 
occupa- 
tions 
chiefly 
intellec- 
tual, 


736 the wealth of nations 

of individuals, there is an almost infinite variety in those of the 
whole society. These varied occupations present an almost infinite 
variety of objects to the contemplation of those few, who, being 
attached to no particular occupation themselves, have leisure and 
inclination to examine the occupations of other people. The con- 
templation of so great a variety of objects necessarily exercises 
their minds in endless comparisons and combinations, and renders 
their understandings, in an extraordinary degree, both acute and 
comprehensive. Unless those few, however, happen to be placed in 
some very particular situations, their great abilities, though hon- 
ourable to themselves, may contribute very little to the good gov- 
ernment or happiness of their society. Notwithstanding the great 
abilities of those few, all the nobler parts of the human character 
may be, in a great measure, obliterated and extinguished in the 
great body of the people. 

The education of the common people requires, perhaps, in a civ- 
ilized and commercial society, the attention of the public more 
than that of people of some rank and fortune. People of some rank 
and fortune are generally eighteen or nineteen years of age before 
they enter upon that particular business, profession, or trade, by 
which they propose to distinguish themselves in the world. They 
have before that full time to acquire, or at least to fit themselves 
for afterwards acquiring, every accomplishment which can recom- 
mend them to the public esteem, or render them worthy of it. Their 
parents or guardians are generally sufficiently anxious that they 
should be so accomplished, and are, in most cases, willing enough 
to lay out the expence which is necessary for that purpose. If they 
are not always properly educated, it is seldom from the want of ex- 
pence laid out upon their education; but from the improper appli- 
cation of that expence. It is seldom from the want of masters; but 
from the negligence and incapacity of the masters who are to be 
had, and from the difficulty, or rather from the impossibility which 
there is, in the present state of things, of finding any better. The 
employments too in which people of some rank or fortune spend the 
greater part of their lives, are not, like those of the common people, 
simple and uniform. They are almost all of them extremely com- 
plicated, and such as exercise the head more than the hands. The 
understandings of those who are engaged in such employments can 
seldom grow torpid for want of exercise. The employments of 
people of some rank and fortune, besides, are seldom such as harass 
them from morning to night. They generally have a good deal of 
leisure, during which they may perfect themselves in every branch 

Ed I reads “from.” 



EDUCATION OE YOUTH 737 

either of useful or ornamental knowledge of which they may have 
laid the foundation, or for which they may have acquired some 
taste in the earlier part of life. 

It is otherwise with the common people. They have little time to unlike the 
spare for education. Their parents can scarce afford to maintain 
them even in infancy. As soon as they are able to work, they must poor, 
apply to some trade by which they can earn their subsistence. That 
trade too is generally so simple and uniform as to give little exer- 
cise to the understanding; while, at the same time, their labour is 
both so constant and so severe, that it leaves them little leisure and 
less inclination to apply to, or even to think of any thing else. 

But though the common people cannot, in any civilized society, The 
ne so well instructed as people of some rank and fortune, the most 
essential parts of education, however, to read, write, and account, or 
can be acquired at so early a period of life, that the greater part on the 
even of those who are to be bred to the lowest occupations, have fgquirL 
time to acquire them before they can be employed in those occupa- ment of 
tions. For a very small expence the public can facilitate, can en- reading, 

courage, and can even impose upon almost the whole body of the and^^fth- 

people, the necessity of acquiring those most essential parts of ed- metic, 
ucation. 

The public can facilitate this acquisition by establishing in every by estab- 
parish or district a little school, where children may be taught for a 
reward so moderate, that even a common labourer may aford it; schools 
the master being partly, but not wholly paid by the public; be- 
cause, if he was wholly, or even principally paid by it, he would 
soon learn to neglect his business. In Scotland the establishment of 
such parish schools has taught almost the whole common people to 
read, and a very great proportion of them to write and account. In 
England the establishment of charity schools has had an effect of 
the same kind, though not so universally, because the establish- 
ment is not so universal. If in those little schools the books, by 
which the children are taught to read, were a little more instruc- 
tive than they commonly are; and if, instead of a little smat- 
tering of Latin, which the children of the common people are some- 
times taught there, and which can scarce ever be of any use to 
them; they were instructed in the elementary parts of geometry 
and mechanics, the literary education of this rank of people would 
perhaps be as complete as it can There is scarce a common 
trade which does not afford some opportunities of applying to it 
the principles of geometry and mechanics, and which would not 
therefore gradually exercise and improve the common people in 
Ed. I reads “the.” ^ Ed. i reads “as it is capable of being.” 



giving 

prizes, 


and re- 
quiring 
men to 
pass an 
examina- 
tion be- 
fore set- 
ting up 
in trade. 

In this 
way the 
Greeks 
and 

Romans 
main- 
tained a 
martial 
spirit. 


Martial 
spirit in 
the people 
would 
diminish 
both the 
necessary 
size and 
the dan- 
ger of a 
standing 
army. 


738 the wealth of nations 

those principles, the necessary introduction to the most sublime as 
well as to the most useful sciences. 

The public can encourage the acquisition of those most essential 
parts of education by giving small premiums, and little badges of 
distinction, to the children of the common people who excel in 
them. 

The public can impose upon almost the whole body of the people 
the necessity of acquiring those most essential parts of education, 
by obliging every man to undergo an examination or probation in 
them before he can obtain the freedom in any corporation, or be al- 
lowed to set up any trade either in a village or town corporate. 

It was in this manner, by facilitating the acquisition of their mili- 
tary and gymnastic exercises, by encouraging it, and even by im- 
posing upon the whole body of the people the necessity of learning 
those exercises, that the Greek and Roman republics maintained the 
martial spirit of their respective citizens. They facilitated the ac- 
quisition of those exercises by appointing a certain place for learn- 
ing and practising them, and by granting to certain masters the 
privilege of teaching in that place. Those masters do not appear to 
have had either salaries or exclusive privileges of any kind. Their 
reward consisted altogether in what they got from their scholars; 
and a citizen who had learnt his exercises in the public Gymnasia, 
had no sort of legal advantage over one who had learnt them pri- 
vately, provided the latter had learnt them equally well Those re- 
publics encouraged the acquisition of those exercises, by bestowing 
little premiums and badges of distinction upon those who excelled 
in them. To have gained a prize in the Olympic, Isthmian or Nem- 
aean games gave illustration, not only to the person who gained it, 
but to his whole family and kindred. The obligation which every 
citizen was under to serve a certain number of years, if called upon, 
in the armies of the republic, sufficiently imposed the necessity of 
learning those exercises without which he could not be fit for that 
service. 

That in the progress of improvement the practice of military ex- 
ercises, unless government takes proper pains to support it, goes 
gradually to decay, and, together with it, the martial spirit of the 
great body of the people, the example of modern Europe sufficient- 
ly demonstrates. But the security of every society must always de- 
pend, more or less, upon the martial spirit of the great body of the 
people. In the present times, indeed, that martial spirit alone, and 
unsupported by a well-disciplined standing army, would not, per- 
haps, be sufficient for the defence and security of any society. But 
where every citizen had the spirit of a soldier, a smaller standing 



EDUCATION OF YOUTH 739 

army would surely be requisite. That spirit, besides, would neces- 
sarily diminish very much the dangers to liberty, whether real or 
imaginary, which are commonly apprehended from a standing 
army. As it would very much facilitate the operations of that army 
against a foreign invader, so it would obstruct them as much if un- 
fortunately they should ever be directed against the constitution of 
the state. 

The ancient institutions of Greece and Rome seem to have been 
much more effectual, for maintaining the martial spirit of the great 
body of the people, than the establishment of what are called the 
militias of modern times. They were much more simple. When they 
were once established, they executed themselves, and it required 
little or no attention from government to maintain them in the most 
perfect vigour. Whereas to maintain, even in tolerable execution, 
the complex regulations of any modern militia, requires the con- 
tinual and painful attention of government, without which they are 
constantly falling into total neglect and disuse. The influence, be- 
sides, of the ancient institutions was much more universal. By 
means of them the whole body of the people was completely in- 
structed in the use of arms. Whereas it is but a very small part of 
them who can ever be so instructed by the regulations of any mod- 
ern militia; except, perhaps, that of Switzerland. But a coward, a 
man incapable either of defending or of revenging himself, evident- 
ly wants one of the most essential parts of the character of a man. 
He is as much mutilated and deformed in his mind as another is in 
his body, who is either deprived of some of its most essential mem- 
bers, or has lost the use of them.^^® He is evidently the more wretch- 
ed and miserable of the two; because happiness and misery, which 
reside altogether in the mind, must necessarily depend more upon 
the healthful or unhealthful, the mutilated or entire state of the 
mind, than upon that of the body. Even though the martial spirit 
of the people were of no use towards the defence of the society, yet 
to prevent that sort of mental mutilation, deformity, and wretched- 
ness, which cowardice necessarily involves in it, from spreading 
themselves through the great body of the people, would still de- 
serve the most serious attention of government; in the same man- 
ner as it would deserve its most serious attention to prevent a lep- 
rosy or any other loathsome and offensive disease, though neither 
mortal nor dangerous, from spreading itself among them; though, 
perhaps, no other public good might result from such attention be- 
sides the prevention of so great a public evil. 

The same thing may be said of the gross ignorance and stupidity 


The 
Greek 
and 
Roman 
institu- 
tions were 
more ef- 
fectual 
than 
modern 
militias, 
which 
only in- 
clude a 
small por- 
tion of 
the 

people. 

It is the 
duty of 
govern- 
ment to 
prevent 
the 

growth 

of 

coward- 

ice, 


^ Ed. I reads “the use of those members.’ 



gross ig- 
norance 
and stu- 
pidity. 


These 
institu- 
tions are 
chiefly 
for reli- 
gious 
instruc- 
tion. 

Religious 
like other 
teachers 
are more 
vigorous 
ifun- 


740 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

which, in a civilized society, seem so frequently to benumb the un- 
derstandings of all the inferior ranks of people. A man without the 
proper use of the intellectual faculties of a man, is, if possible, more 
contemptible than even a coward, and seems to be mutilated and 
deformed in a still more essential part of the character of human 
nature. Though the state was to derive no advantage from the in- 
struction of the inferior ranks of people, it would still deserve its 
attention that they should not be altogether uninstructed. The 
state, however; derives no inconsiderable advantage from their in- 
struction. The more they are instructed, the less liable they are to 
the delusions of enthusiasm and superstition, which, among igno- 
rant nations, frequently occasion the most dreadful disorders. An 
instructed and intelligent people besides, are always more decent 
and orderly than an ignorant and stupid one. They feel themselves, 
each individually more respectable, and more likely to obtain the 
respect of their lawful superiors, and they are therefore more dis- 
posed to respect those superiors. They are more disposed to exam- 
ine, and more capable of seeing through, the interested complaints 
of faction and sedition, and they are, upon that account, less apt to 
be misled into any wanton or unnecessary opposition to the meas- 
ures of government. In free countries, where the safety of govern- 
ment depends very much upon the favourable judgment which the 
people may form of its conduct, it must surely be of the highest im- 
portance that they should not be disposed to judge rashly or capri- 
ciously concerning it. 


Article III 

Of the Expence of the Institutions for the Instruction of People 
of all Ages 

The institutions for the instruction of people of all ages are chiefly 
those for religious instruction. This is a species of instruction of 
which the object is not so much to render the people good citizens 
in this world, as to prepare them for another and a better world in 
a life to come. The teachers of the doctrine which contains this in- 
struction, in the same manner as other teachers, may either depend 
altogether for their subsistence upon the voluntary contributions of 
their hearers; or they may derive it from some other fund to which 
the law of their country may entitle them; such as a landed estate, 
a tythe or land tax, an established salary or stipend. Their exertion, 
their zeal and industry, are likely to be much greater in the former 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 74i 

situation than in the latter. In this respect the teachers of new re- estab- 
ligions have always had a considerable advantage in attacking kshedand 
those ancient and established systems of which the clergy, reposing dowed. 
themselves upon their benefices, had neglected to keep up the fer- 
vour of faith and devotion in the great body of the people; and 
having given themselves up to indolence, were become altogether in- 
capable of making any vigorous exertion in defence even of their 
own establishment. The clergy of an established and well-endowed 
religion frequently become men of learning and elegance, who pos- 
sess all the virtues of gentlemen, or which can recommend them to 
the esteem of gentlemen; but they are apt gradually to lose the 
qualities, both good and bad, which gave them authority and in- 
fluence with the inferior ranks of people, and which had perhaps 
been the original causes of the success and establishment of their 
religion. Such a clergy, when attacked by a set of popular and bold, 
though perhaps stupid and ignorant enthusiasts, feel themselves as 
perfectly defenceless as the indolent, effeminate, and full-fed na- 
tions of the southern parts of Asia, when they were invaded by the 
active, hardy, and hungry Tartars of the North. Such a clergy, up- 
on such an emergency, have commonly no other resource than to 
call upon the civil magistrate to persecute, destroy, or drive out 
their adversaries, as disturbers of the public peace. It was thus that 
the Roman catholic clergy called upon the civil magistrate to perse- 
cute the protestants; and the church of England, to persecute the 
dissenters; and that in general every religious sect, when it has 
once enjoyed for a century or two the security of a legal establish- 
ment, has found itself incapable of making any vigorous defence 
against any new sect which chose to attack its doctrine or discipline. 

Upon such occasions the advantage in point of learning and good 
writing may sometimes be on the side of the established church. 

But the arts of popularity, all the arts of gaining proselytes, are 
constantly on the side of its adversaries. In England those arts have 
been long neglected by the well-endowed clergy of the established 
church, and are at present chiefly cultivated by the dissenters and 
by the methodists. The independent provisions, however, which in 
many places have been made for dissenting teachers, by means of 
voluntary subscriptions, of trust rights, and other evasions of the 
law, seem very much to have abated the zeal and activity of those 
teachers. They have many of them become very learned, ingenious, 
and respectable men; but they have in general ceased to be very 
popular preachers. The methodists, without half the learning of the 
dissenters, are much more in vogue. 

In the church of Rome, the industry and zeal of the inferior 



742 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


The in- 
ferior 
clergy of 
the 

Church of 
Rome are 
more 
stimu- 
lated by 
self-inter- 
est than 
those of 
any 
estab- 
lished 
Protest- 
ant 

Church. 


Hume 
says the 
state may 
leave the 
promo- 
tion of 
some arts 
to indi- 
viduals 
who 
benefit 
by them, 


others 
must be 
promoted 
by the 
state ; 


clergy are kept more alive by the powerful motive of self-inter- 
est, than perhaps in any established protestant church. The paro- 
chial clergy derive, many of them, a very considerable part of their 
subsistence from the voluntary oblations of the people; a source of 
revenue which confession gives them many opportunities of improv- 
ing. The mendicant orders derive their whole subsistence from such 
oblations. It is with them, as with the hussars and light infantry of 
some armies; no plunder, no pay. The parochial clergy are like 
those teachers whose reward depends partly upon their salary, and 
partly upon the fee or honoraries which they get from their pupils; 
and these must always depend more or less upon their industry 
and reputation. The mendicant orders are like those teachers whose 
subsistence depends altogether upon their industry. They are ob- 
liged, therefore, to use every art which can animate the devotion of 
the common people. The establishment of the two great mendicant 
orders of St. Dominic and St. Francis, it is observed by Machi- 
avel,^^^ revived, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the lan- 
guishing faith and devotion of the catholic church. In Roman cath- 
olic countries the spirit of devotion is supported altogether by the 
monks and by the poorer parochial clergy. The great dignitaries of 
the church, with all the accomplishments of gentlemen and men of 
the world, and sometimes with those of men of learning, are care- 
ful enough to maintain the necessary discipline over their inferiors, 
but seldom give themselves any trouble about the instruction of 
the people. 

^‘Most of the arts and professions in a state,” says by far the 
most illustrious philosopher and historian of the present age, ‘‘are 
of such a nature, that, while they promote the interests of the so- 
ciety, they are also useful or agreeable to some individuals; and in 
that case, the constant rule of the magistrate, except, perhaps, on 
the first introduction of any art, is, to leave the profession to itself, 
and trust its encouragement to the individuals who reap the benefit 
of it. The artizans, finding their profits to rise by the favour of their 
customers, increase, as much as possible, their skill and industry; 
and as matters are not disturbed by any injudicious tampering, the 
commodity is always sure to be at all times nearly proportioned to 
the demand. 

“But there are also some callings, which, though useful and even 
necessary in a state, bring no advantage or pleasure to any individ- 
ual, and the supreme power is obliged to alter its conduct with re- 
gard to the retainers of those professions. It must give them public 

Eds. 1-3 read “is.” 

In “Discourses on the First Decade of Titus Livius book iii., chap. i. 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 743 

encouragement in order to their subsistence; and it must provide 
against that negligence to which they will naturally be subject, 
either by annexing particular honours to the profession, by estab 
lishing a long subordination of ranks and a strict dependance, or by 
some other expedient. The persons employed in the finances, 
fleets, and magistracy, are instances of this order of men. 

' ^It may naturally be thought, at first sight, that the ecclesiastics 
belong to the first class, and that their encouragement, as well as 
that of lawyers and physicians, may safely be entrusted to the lib- 
erality of individuals, who are attached to their doctrines, and who 
find benefit or consolation from their spiritual ministry and assis- 
tance. Their industry and vigilance wiU, no doubt, be whetted by 
such an additional motive; and their skill in the profession, as well 
as their address in governing the minds of the people, must receive 
daily increase, from their increasing practice, study, and attention. 

“But if we consider the matter more closely, we shall find, that 
this interested diligence of the clergy is what every wise legislator 
will study to prevent; because, in every religion except the true, it 
is highly pernicious, and it has even a natural tendency to pervert 
the true, by infusing into it a strong mixture of superstition, folly, 
and delusion. Each ghostly practitioner, in order to render himself 
more precious and sacred in the eyes of his retainers, will inspire 
them with the most violent abhorrence of all other sects, and con- 
tinually endeavour, by some novelty, to excite the languid devo- 
tion of his audience. No regard will be paid to truth, morals, or de- 
cency in the doctrines inculcated. Every tenet will be adopted that 
best suits the disorderly affections of the human frame. Customers 
will be drawn to each conventicle by new industry and address in 
practising on the passions and credulity of the populace. And in the 
end, the civil magistrate will find, that he has dearly paid for his 
pretended frugality, in saving a fixed establishment for the priests; 
and that in reality the most decent and advantageous composition, 
which he can make with the spiritual guides, is to bribe their in- 
dolence, by assigning stated salaries to their profession, and render- 
ing it superfluous for them to be farther active, than merely to pre- 
vent their flock from straying in quest of new pastures. And in this 
manner ecclesiastical establishments, though commonly they arose 
at first from religious views, prove in the end advantageous to the 
political interests of society.” 

But whatever may have been the good or bad effects of the in- 

The original reads “finances, armies, fleets.” 

^^Hume, History, chap, xxix., vol. iv., pp. 30 , in ed. of i773, which 
differs verbally both from earlier and from later editions. 


it might 
be 

thought 
that the 
teaching 
of religion 
belonged 
to the 
first class, 


but it 
does not, 
because 
the inter- 
ested 2 eai 
of the 
clergj’ 
should be 
discour- 
aged. 



EstabKsh- 
ments and 
public 
endow- 
ments 
have not 
been due 
to reason- 
ing like 
this, but 
to the 
needs of 
political 
faction. 


If politics 
had never 
cdledin 
the aid of 
religion, 
sects 
would 
have been 
so nume- 
rous that 
they 
would 
have 


744 the wealth OF NATIONS 

dependent provision of the clergy; it has, perhaps, been very sel- 
dom bestowed upon them from any view to those effects. Times of 
violent religious controversy have generally been times of equally 
violent political faction. Upon such occasions, each political party 
has either found it, or imagined it, for its interest, to league itself 
with some one or other of the contending religious sects. But this 
could be done only by adopting, or at least by favouring, the tenets 
of that particular sect. The sect which had the good fortune to be 
leagued with the conquering party, necessarily shared in the vic- 
tory of its ally, by whose favour and protection it was soon en- 
abled in some degree to silence and subdue all its adversaries. Those 
adversaries had generally leagued themselves with the enemies of 
the conquering party, and were therefore the enemies of that party. 
The clergy of this particular sect having thus become complete 
masters of the field, and their influence and authority with the 
great body of the people being in its highest vigour, they were 
powerful enough to over-awe the chiefs and leaders of their own 
party, and to oblige the civil magistrate to respect their opinions 
and inclinations. Their first demand was generally, that he should 
silence and subdue all their adversaries; and their second, that he 
should bestow an independent provision on themselves. As they 
had generally contributed a good deal to the victory, it seemed not 
unreasonable that they should have some share in the spoil. They 
were weary, besides, of humouring the people, and of depending 
upon their caprice for a subsistence. In making this demand there- 
fore they consulted their own ease and comfort, without troubling 
themselves about the effect which it might have in future times up- 
on the influence and authority of their order. The civil magistrate, 
who could comply with this demand only by giving them some- 
thing which he would have chosen much rather to take, or to keep 
to himself, was seldom very forward to grant it. Necessity, how- 
ever, always forced him to submit at last, though frequently not till 
after many delays, evasions, and affected excuses. 

But if politics had never called in the aid of religion, had the 
conquering party never adopted the tenets of one sect more than 
those of another, when it had gained the victory, it would prob- 
ably have dealt equally and impartially with all the different sects, 
and have allowed every man to chuse his own priest and his own 
religion as he thought proper. There would in this case, no doubt, 
have been a great multitude of religious sects. Almost every differ- 
ent congregation might probably have made a little sect by itself, 
or have entertained some peculiar tenets of its own. Each teacher 
would no doubt have felt himself under the necessity of making 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 745 

the utmost exertion, and of using every art both to preserve and to learnt to 
increase the number of his disciples. But as every other teacher 
would have felt himself under the same necessity, the success of other, 
no one teacher, or sect of teachers, could have been very great. The 
interested and active zeal of religious teachers can be dangerous 
and troublesome only where there is, either but one sect tolerated 
in the society, or where the whole of a large society is divided into 
two or three great sects; the teachers of each acting by concert, 
and under a regular discipline and subordination. But that zeal 
must be altogether innocent where the society is divided into two 
or three hundred, or perhaps into as many thousand small sects, of 
which no one could be considerable enough to disturb the public 
tranquillity. The teachers of each sect, seeing themselves surround- 
ed on all sides with more adversaries than friends, would be obliged 
to learn that candour and moderation which is so seldom to be 
found among the teachers of those great sects, whose tenets, being 
supported by the civil magistrate, are held in veneration by almost 
all the inhabitants of extensive kingdoms and empires, and who 
therefore see nothing round them but followers, disciples, and 
humble admirers. The teachers of each little sect, finding them- 
selves almost alone, would be obliged to respect those of almost 
every other sect, and the concessions which they would mutually 
find it both convenient and agreeable to make to one another, 
might in time probably reduce the doctrine of the greater part of 
them to that pure and rational religion, free from every mixture 
of absurdity, imposture, or fanaticism, such as wise men have in 
all ages of the world wished to see established; but such as positive 
law has perhaps never yet established, and probably never will 
establish in any country: because, with regard to religion, positive 
law always has been, and probably always will be, more or less in- 
fluenced by popular superstition and enthusiasm. This plan of ec- 
clesiastical government, or more properly of no ecclesiastical gov- 
ernment, was what the sect called Independents, a sect no doubt 
of very wild enthusiasts, proposed to establish in England towards 
the end of the civil war. If it had been established, though of a very 
unphilosophical origin, it would probably by this time hpe been 
productive of the most philosophical good temper and moderation 
with regard to every sort of religious principle. It has been estab- 
lished in Pennsylvania, where, though the Quakers happen to be 
the most numerous, the law in reality favours no one sect more 
than another, and it is there said to have been productive of this 
philosophical good temper and moderation. 

^‘®Ed. I reads “of each sect.” ^"Ed. i reads “the most numerous sect” 



and if 
they did 
not, their 
zeal could 
do no 
harm. 


Of the 
two sys- 
tems of 
morality, 
the strict 
or austere 
and the 
liberal or 
loose, the 
first is 
favoured 
by the 
common 
people, 
the sec- 
ond by 
people of 
fashion. 


74^ THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

But though this equality of treatment should not be productive 
of this good temper and moderation in all, or even in the greater 
part of the religious sects of a particular country; yet provided 
those sects were sufficiently numerous, and each of them conse- 
quently too small to disturb the public tranquillity, the excessive 
zeal of each for its particular tenets could not well be productive 
of any very hurtful effects, but, on the contrary, of several good 
ones: and if the government was perfectly decided both to let them 
all alone, and to oblige them all to let alone one another, there is 
little danger that they would not of their own accord subdivide 
themselves fast enough, so as soon to become sufficiently numerous. 

In every civilized society, in every society where the distinction 
of ranks has once been completely established, there have been al- 
ways two different schemes or systems of morality current at the 
same time; of which the one may be called the strict or austere; 
the other the liberal, or, if you will, the loose system. The former is 
generally admired and revered by the common people: the latter 
is commonly more esteemed and adopted by what are called people 
of fashion. The degree of disapprobation with which we ought to 
mark the vices of levity, the vices which are apt to arise from great 
prosperity, and from the excess of gaiety and good humour, seems 
to constitute the principal distinction between those two opposite 
schemes or systems. In the liberal or loose system, luxury, wanton 
and even disorderly mirth, the pursuit of pleasure to some degree 
of intemperance, the breach of chastity, at least in one of the two 
sexes, &c. provided they are not accompanied with gross indecency, 
and do not lead to falshood or injustice, are generally treated with 
a good deal of indulgence, and are easily either excused or pardoned 
altogether. In the austere system, on the contrary, those excesses 
are regarded with the utmost abhorrence and detestation. The 
vices of levity are always ruinous to the common people, and a 
single week’s thoughtlessness and dissipation is often sufficient to 
undo a poor workman for ever, and to drive him through despair 
upon committing the most enormous crimes. The wiser and better 
sort of the common people, therefore, have always the utmost ab- 
horrence and detestation of such excesses, which their experience 
tells them are so immediately fatal to people of their condition. The 
disorder and extravagance of several years, on the contrary, will 
not always ruin a man of fashion, and people of that rank are very 
apt to consider the power of indulging in some degree of excess as 
one of the advantages of their fortune, and the liberty of doing so 
without censure or reproach, as one of the privileges which belong 

I reads “of each sect.” 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 747 

to their station. In people of their own station, therefore, they re- 
gard such excesses with but a small degree of disapprobation, and 
censure them either very slightly or not at all. 

Almost all religious sects have begun among the common people, 
from whom they have generally drawn their earliest, as well as their 
most numerous proselytes. The austere system of morality has, ac- 
cordingly, been adopted by those sects almost constantly, or with 
very few exceptions; for there have been some. It was the system 
by which they 'could best recommend themselves to that order of 
people to whom they first proposed their plan of reformation upon 
what had been before established. Many of them, perhaps the 
greater part of them, have even endeavoured to gain credit by re- 
fining upon this austere system, and by carrying it to some degree 
of folly and extravagance; and this excessive rigour has frequently 
recommended them more than any thing else to the respect and 
veneration of the common people. 

A man of rank and fortune is by his station the distinguished 
member of a great society, who attend to every part of his conduct, 
and who thereby oblige him to attend to every part of it himself. 
His authority and consideration depend very much upon the respect 
which this society bears to him. He dare not do any thing which 
would disgrace or discredit him in it, and he is obliged to a very 
strict observation of that species of morals, whether liberal or aus- 
tere, which the general consent of this society prescribes to persons 
of his rank and fortune. A man of low condition, on the contrary, 
is far from being a distinguished member of any great society. 
While he remains in a country village his conduct may be attended 
to, and he may be obliged to attend to it himself. In this situation, 
and in this situation only, he may have what is called a character 
to lose. But as soon as he comes into a great city, he is sunk in ob- 
scurity and darkness. His conduct is observed and attended to by 
nobody, and he is therefore very likely to neglect it himself, and to 
abandon himself to every sort of low profligacy and vice. He never 
emerges so effectually from this obscurity, his conduct never excites 
so much the attention of any respectable society, as by his becom- 
ing the member of a small religious sect. He from that moment ac- 
quires a degree of consideration which he never had before. All his 
brother sectaries are, for the credit of the sect, interested to observe 
his conduct, and if he gives occasion to any scandal, if he deviates 
very much from those austere morals which they almost always re- 
quire of one another, to punish him by what is always a very severe 
punishment, even where no civil effects attend it, expulsion or ex- 
communication from the sect. In little religious sects, accordingly, 


Religious 

sects 

usually 

begin 

with the 

austere 

system, 


and in 
small re- 
ligious 
sects 
morals 
are regu- 
lar and 
orderly 
and even 
disagree- 
ably rig- 
orous 
and un- 
social. 



There are 
two pos- 
sible 

remedies, 

(i) the 
require- 
ment of a 
knowl- 
edge of 
science 
and phil- 
osophy 
from can- 
didates 
for pro- 
fessions 
and 
offices; 


and (2) 
the en- 
courage- 
ment of 
public 
diver- 
sions. 


Where no 
one rdi- 
gion was 
favoured 
the sove- 


74S the wealth of nations 

the morals of the common people have been almost always remark- 
ably regular and orderly; generally much more so than in the estab- 
lished church. The morals of those little sects, indeed, have fre 
quently been rather disagreeably rigorous and unsocial. 

There are two very easy and effectual remedies, however, by 
whose joint operation the state might, without violence, correct 
whatever was unsocial or disagreeably rigorous in the morals of all 
the little sects into which the country was divided. 

The first of those remedies is the study of science and philos- 
ophy, which the state might render almost universal among all peo 
pie of middling or more than middling rank and fortune; not by 
giving salaries to teachers in order to make them negligent and idle, 
but by instituting some sort of probation, even in the higher and 
more difficult sciences, to be undergone by every person before he 
was permitted to exercise any liberal profession, or before he could 
be received as a candidate for any honourable office of trust or 
profit. If the state imposed upon this order of men the necessity of 
learning, it would have no occasion to give itself any trouble about 
providing them with proper teachers. They would soon find better 
teachers for themselves than any whom the state could provide for 
them. Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and 
superstition; and where aU the superior ranks of people were se- 
cured from it, the inferior ranks could not be much exposed to it. 

The second of those remedies is the frequency and gaiety of pub- 
lic diversions. The state, by encouraging, that is by giving entire 
liberty to all those who for their own interest would attempt, with- 
out scandal or indecency, to amuse and divert the people by paint- 
ing, poetry, music, dancing; by all sorts of dramatic representations 
and exhibitions, would easily dissipate, in the greater part of them, 
that melancholy and gloomy humour which is almost always the 
nurse of popular superstition and enthusiasm. Public diversions 
have always been the objects of dread and xiatred, to all the fanat- 
ical promoters of those popular frenzies. The gaiety and good hum- 
our which those diversions inspire were altogether inconsistent 
with that temper of mind, which was fittest for their purpose, c 
which they could best work upon. Dramatic representations besides, 
frequently exposing their artifices to public ridicule, and sometimes 
even to public execration, were upon that account, more than all 
other diversions, the objects of their peculiar abhorrence. 

In a country where the law favoured the teachers of no one re- 
ligion more than those of another, it would not be necessary that 
any of them should have any particular or immediate dependency 
upon the sovereign or executive power; or that he should have any 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 749 

thing to do, either in appointing, or in dismissing them from their 
offices. In such a situation he would have no occasion to give him- 
self any concern about them, further than to keep the peace among 
them, in the same manner as among the rest of his subjects; that is, 
to hinder them from persecuting, abusing, or oppressing one an- 
other. But it is quite otherwise in countries where there is an estab- 
lished or governing religion. The sovereign can in this case never 
be secure, unless he has the means of influencing in a considerable 
degree the greater part of the teachers of that religion. 

The clergy of every established church constitute a great incor- 
poration. They can act in concert, and pursue their interest upon 
one plan and with one spirit, as much as if they were under the di- 
rection of one man; and they are frequently too under such direc- 
tion. Their interest as an incorporated body is never the same with 
that of the sovereign, and is sometimes directly opposite to it. Their 
great interest is to maintain their authority with the people; and 
this authority depends upon the supposed certainty and importance 
of the whole doctrine which they inculcate, and upon the supposed 
necessity of adopting every part of it with the most implicit faith, 
in order to avoid eternal misery. Should the sovereign have the im- 
prudence to appear either to deride or doubt himself of the most 
trifling part of their doctrine, or from humanity attempt to protect 
those who did either the one or the other, the punctilious honour 
of a clergy who have no sort of dependency upon him, is immedi- 
ately provoked to proscribe him as a profane person, and to em- 
ploy all the terrors of religion in order to oblige the people to trans- 
fer their allegiance to some more orthodox and obedient prince. 
Should he oppose any of their pretensions or usurpations, the dan- 
ger is equally great. The princes who have dared in this manner to 
rebel against the church, over and above this crime of rebellion, 
have generally been charged too with the additional crime of heresy, 
notwithstanding their solemn protestations of their faith and hum- 
ble submission to every tenet which she thought proper to prescribe 
to them. But the authority of religion is superior to every other au- 
thority. The fears which it suggests conquer all other fears. When 
the authorised teachers of religion propagate through the great 
body of the people doctrines subversive of the authority of the sov- 
ereign, it is by violence only, or by the force of a standing army, 
that he can maintain his authority. Even a standing army cannot 
in this case give him any lasting security; because if the soldiers 
are not foreigners, which can seldom be the case, but drawn from 
the great body of the people, which must almost always be the case, 
they are likely to be soon corrupted by those very doctrines. The 


reign 

would not 
require 
to influ- 
ence the 
teachers 
of reli- 
gion, 


as he 
must 
where 
there is 
an estab- 
lished 
church, 



since he 
cannot 
directly 
oppose 
the doc- 
trines of 
the 

clergy. 


The 
clergy 
hold their 
benefices 
for life, 
and vio- 
lence used 
against 
them 
would be 
ineffec- 
tual; so 
manage- 
ment 
must be 
resorted 
to. 


750 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

revolutions which the turbulence of the Greek clergy was continu- 
ally occasioning at Constantinople, as long as the eastern empire 
subsisted; the convulsions which, during the course of several cen- 
turies, the turbulence of the Roman clergy was continually occa- 
sioning in every part of Europe, sufficiently demonstrate how pre- 
carious and insecure must always be the situation of the sovereign 
who has no proper means of influencing the clergy of the established 
and governing religion of his country. 

Articles of faith, as well as all other spiritual matters, it is evi- 
dent enough, are not within the proper department of a temporal 
sovereign, who, though he may be very well qualified for protect- 
ing, is seldom supposed to be so for instructing the people. With re- 
gard to such matters, therefore, his authority can seldom be suffi- 
cient to counterbalance the united authority of the clergy of the 
established church. The public tranquillity, however, and his own 
security, may frequently depend upon the doctrines which they may 
think proper to propagate concerning such matters. As he can sel- 
dom directly oppose their decision, therefore, with proper weight 
and authority, it is necessary that he should be able to influence it; 
and he can influence it only by the fears and expectations which he 
may excite in the greater part of the individuals of the order. Those 
fears and expectations may consist in the fear of deprivation or 
other punishment, and in the expectation of further preferment. 

In all Christian churches the benefices of the clergy are a sort of 
freeholds which they enjoy, not during pleasure, but during life, or 
good behaviour. If they held them by a more precarious tenure, 
and were liable to be turned out upon every slight disobligation 
either of the sovereign or of his ministers, it would perhaps be im- 
possible for them to maintain their authority with the people, who 
would then consider them as mercenary dependents upon the court, 
in the sincerity of whose instructions they could no longer have any 
confidence. But should the sovereign attempt irregularly, and by 
violence, to deprive any number of clergymen of their freeholds, on 
account, perhaps, of their having propagated, with more than or- 
dinary zeal, some factious or seditious doctrine, he would only ren- 
der, by such persecution, both them and their doctrine ten times 
more popular, and therefore ten times more troublesome and dan- 
gerous than they had been before. Fear is in almost all cases a 
wretched instrument of government, and ought in particular never 
to be employed against any order of men who have the smallest 
pretensions to independency. To attempt to terrify them, serves 
only to irritate their bad humour, and to confirm them in an oppo- 
sition which more gentle usage perhaps might easily induce them. 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 7Si 

either to softeiij or to lay aside altogether. The violence which the 
French government usually employed in order to oblige all their 
parliaments, or sovereign courts of justice, to enregister any unpop- 
ular edict, very seldom succeeded. The means commonly employed, 
however, the imprisonment of all the refractory members, one 
would think were forcible enough. The princes of the house of 
Stewart sometimes employed the like means in order to influence 
some of the members of the parliament of England; and they gen- 
erally found them equally intractable. The parliament of England 
is now managed in another manner; and a very small experiment, 
which the duke of Choiseul made about twelve years ago upon the 
parliament of Paris, demonstrated sufficiently that all the parlia- 
ments of France might have been managed still more easily in the 
same manner. That experiment was not pursued. For though man- 
agement and persuasion are always the easiest and the safest in- 
struments of government, as force and violence are the worst and 
the most dangerous, yet such, it seems, is the natural insolence of 
man, that he almost always disdains to use the good instrument, 
except when he cannot or dare not use the bad one. The French 
government could and durst use force, and therefore disdained to 
use management and persuasion. But there is no order of men, it 
appears, I believe, from the experience of all ages, upon whom it is 
so dangerous, or rather so perfectly ruinous, to employ force and 
violence, as upon the respected clergy of any established church. 
The rights, the privileges, the personal liberty of every individual 
ecclesiastic, who is upon good terms with his own order, are, even 
in the most despotic governments, more respected than those of any 
other person of nearly equal rank and fortune. It is so in every 
gradation of despotism, from that of the gentle and mild govern- 
ment of Paris, to that of the violent and furious government of 
Constantinople. But though this order of men can scarce ever be 
forced, they may be managed as easily as any other; and the secur- 
ity of the sovereign, as well as the public tranquillity, seems to de- 
pend very much upon the means which he has of managing them; 
and those means seem to consist altogether in the preferment which 
he has to bestow upon them. 

In the ancient constitution of the Christian church,^^® the bish- 
op of each diocese was elected by the joint votes of the clergy and 
of the people of the episcopal city. The people did not long retain 
their right of election; and while they did retain it, they almost al- 
ways acted under the influence of the clergy, who in such spiritual 
matters appeared to be their natural guides. The clergy, however. 


Bishops 
were 
originally 
elected by 
the clergy 
and 
people, 
after- 


^‘®Ed. r reads “Roman catholic church.’ 



wards 
by the 
clergy 
alone, 


still later 
to a large 
extent by 
the Pope. 


This, 
joined 
with the 
great 
wealth of 
the clergy, 
rendered 
them ex- 
ceedingly 
formid- 
able. 


752 the wealth of nations 

soon grew weary of the trouble of managing them, and found it 
easier to elect their own bishops themselves. The abbot, in the same 
manner, was elected by the monks of the monastery, at least in the 
greater part of abbacies. All the inferior ecclesiastical benefices 
comprehended within the diocese were collated by the bishop, who 
bestowed them upon such ecclesiastics as he thought proper. All 
church preferments were in this manner in the disposal of the 
church. The sovereign, though he might have some indirect influ- 
ence in those elections, and though it was sometimes usual to ask 
both his consent to elect, and his approbation of the election, yet 
had no direct or sufficient means of managing the clergy. The ambi- 
tion of every clergyman naturally led him to pay court, not so 
much to his sovereign, as to his own order, from which only he 
could expect preferment. 

Through the greater part of Europe the Pope gradually drew to 
himself first the collation of almost all bishoprics and abbacies, or 
of what were called Consistorial benefices, and afterwards, by va- 
rious machinations and pretences, of the greater part of inferior 
benefices comprehended within each diocese; little more being left 
to the bishop than what was barely necessary to give him a decent 
authority with his own clergy. By this arrangement the condition 
of the sovereign was still worse than it had been before. The clergy 
of all the different countries of Europe were thus formed into a sort 
of spiritual army, dispersed in different quarters, indeed, but of 
which all the movements and operations could now be directed by 
one head, and conducted upon one uniform plan. The clergy of 
each particular country might be considered as a particular detach- 
ment of that army, of which the operations could easily be sup- 
ported and seconded by all the other detachments quartered in the 
different countries round about. Each detachment was not only in- 
dependent of the sovereign of the country in which it was quar- 
tered, and by which it was maintained, but dependent upon a for- 
eign sovereign, who could at any time turn its arms against the sov- 
ereign of that particular country, and support them by the arms of 
all the other detachments. 

Those arms were the most formidable that can well be imagined. 
In the ancient state of Europe, before the establishment of arts and 
manufactures, the wealth of the clergy gave them the same sort of 
influence over the common people, which that of the great barons 
gave them over their respective vassals, tenants, and retainers. In 
the great landed estates, which the mistaken piety both of princes 
and private persons had bestowed upon the church, jurisdictions 
were established of the same kind with those of the great barons; 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 753 

and for the same reason. In those great landed estates, the clergy, 
or their bailiffs, could easily keep the peace without the support or 
assistance either of the king or of any other person; and neither the 
king nor any other person could keep the peace there without the 
support and assistance of the clergy. The jurisdictions of the clergy, 
therefore, in their particular baronies or manors, were equally in- 
dependent, and equally exclusive of the authority of the king’s 
courts, as those of the great temporal lords. The tenants of the 
clergy were, like those of the great barons, almost all tenants at 
will, entirely dependent upon their immediate lords, and therefore 
liable to be called out at pleasure, in order to fight in any quarrel 
in which the clergy might think proper to engage them. Over and 
above the rents of those estates, the clergy possessed, in the tythes, 
a very large portion of the rents of all the other estates in every 
kingdom of Europe. The revenues arising from both those species 
of rents were, the greater part of them, paid in kind, in corn, wine, 
cattle, poultry, &c. The quantity exceeded greatly what the clergy 
could themselves consume; and there were neither arts nor manu- 
factures for the produce of which they could exchange the surplus. 
The clergy could derive advantage from this immense surplus in no 
other way than by employing it, as the great barons employed the 
like surplus of their revenues, in the most profuse hospitality, and 
in the most extensive charity. Both the hospitality and the charity 
of the ancient clergy, accordingly, are said to have been very great, 
They not only maintained almost the whole poor of every kingdom, 
but many knights and gentlemen had frequently no other means of 
subsistence than by travelling about from monastery to monastery, 
under pretence of devotion, but in reality to enjoy the hospitality 
of the clergy. The retainers of some particular prelates were often 
as numerous as those of the greatest lay-lords; and the retainers of 
all the clergy taken together were, perhaps, more numerous than 
those of all the lay-lords. There was always much more union 
among the clergy than among the lay-lords. The former were under 
a regular discipline and subordination to the papal authority. The 
latter were under no regular discipline or subordination, but almost 
always equally jealous of one another, and of the king. Though the 
tenants and retainers of the clergy, therefore, had both together 
been less numerous than those of the great lay-lords, and their ten- 
ants were probably much less numerous, yet their union would 
have rendered them more formidable. The hospitality and charity 
of the clergy too, not only gave them the command of a great temp- 
oral force, but increased very much the weight of their spiritual 
weapons. Those virtues procured them the highest respect and ven- 



Benefit of 

clergy and 

other 

privileges 

were the 

natural 

result. 


The 

Church of 
Rome in 
the 

Middle 
Ages was 
the most 
formid- 
able com- 
bination 
against 
liberty, 
reason 
and hap- 
piness. 


754 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

eration among all the inferior ranks of people, of whom many were 
constantly, and almost all occasionally, fed by them. Every thing 
belonging or related to so popular an order, its possessions, its priv- 
ileges, its doctrines, necessarily appeared sacred in the eyes of the 
common people, and every violation of them, whether real or pre- 
tended, the highest act of sacrilegious wickedness and profaneness. 
In this state of things, if the sovereign frequently found it difficult 
to resist the confederacy of a few of the great nobility, we cannot 
wonder that he should find it still more so to resist the united force 
of the clergy of his own dominions, supported by that of the clergy 
of all the neighbouring dominions. In such circumstances the won- 
der is, not that he was sometimes obliged to yield, but that he ever 
was able to resist. 

The privileges of the clergy in those ancient times (which to us 
who live in the present times appear the most absurd), their total 
exemption from the secular jurisdiction, for example, or what in 
England was called the benefit of clergy; were the natural or rather 
the necessary consequences of this state of things. How dangerous 
must it have been for the sovereign to attempt to punish a clergy- 
man for any crime whatever, if his own order were disposed to pro- 
tect him, and to represent either the proof as insufficient for con- 
victing so holy a man, or the punishment as too severe to be in- 
flicted upon one whose person had been rendered sacred by reli- 
gion? The sovereign could, in such circumstances, do no better 
than leave him to be tried by the ecclesiastical courts, who, for the 
honour of their own order, were interested to restrain, as much as 
possible, every member of it from committing enormous crimes, or 
even from giving occasion to such gross scandal as might disgust 
the minds of the people. 

In the state in which things were through the greater part of 
Europe during the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centu- 
ries, and for some time both before and after that period, the con- 
stitution of the church of Rome may be considered as the most 
formidable combination that ever was formed against the author- 
ity and security of civil government, as well as against the liberty, 
reason, and happiness of mankind, which can flourish only where 
civil government is able to protect them. In that constitution the 
grossest delusions of superstition were supported in such a manner 
by the private interests of so great a number of people as put them 
out of all danger from any assault of human reason: because 
though human reason might perhaps have been able to unveil, even 
to the eyes of the common people, some of the delusions of super- 
stition; it could never have dissolved the ties of private interest. 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 755 

Had this constitution been attacked by no other enemies but the 
feeble efforts of human reason, it must have endured for ever. But 
that immense and well-built fabric, which all the wisdom and vir- 
tue of man could never have shaken, much less have overturned, 
was by the natural course of things, first weakened, and after- 
wards in part destroyed, and is now likely, in the course of a few 
centuries more, perhaps, to crumble into ruins altogether. 

The gradual improvements of arts, manufactures, and com- 
merce, the same causes which destroyed the power of the great bar- 
ons, destroyed in the same manner, through the greater part of 
Europe, the whole temporal power of the clergy. In the produce of 
arts, manufactures, and commerce, the clergy, like the great bar- 
ons, found something for which they could exchange their rude 
produce, and thereby discovered the means of spending their whole 
revenues upon their own persons, without giving any considerable 
share of them to other people. Their charity became gradually less 
extensive, their hospitality less liberal or less profuse. Their retain- 
ers became consequently less numerous, and by degrees dwindled 
away altogether. The clergy too, like the great barons, wished to 
get a better rent from their landed estates, in order to spend it, in 
the same manner, upon the gratification of their own private van- 
ity and folly. But this increase of rent could be got only by grant- 
ing leases to their tenants, who thereby became in a great measure 
independent of them. The ties of interest, which bound the inferior 
ranks of people to the clergy, were in this manner gradually broken 
and dissolved. They were even broken and dissolved sooner than 
those which bound the same ranks of people to the great barons: 
because the benefices of the church being, the greater part of them, 
much smaller than the estates of the great barons, the possessor of 
each benefice was much sooner able to spend the whole of its rev- 
enue upon his own person. During the greater part of the four- 
teenth and fifteenth centuries the power of the great barons was, 
through the greater part of Europe, in full vigour. But the temp- 
oral power of the clergy, the absolute command which they had 
once had over the great body of the people, was very much decay- 
ed. The power of the church was by that time very nearly reduced 
through the greater part of Europe to what arose from her spiritual 
authority; and even that spiritual authority was much weakened 
when it ceased to be supported by the charity and hospitality of the 
clergy. The inferior ranks of people no longer looked upon that 
order, as they had done before, as the comforters of their distress, 
and the relievers of their indigence. On the contrary, they were pro- 

Ed. I does not contsun “and.” 


Itspow r 
was de- 
stroyed 
by the 
improve- 
ment of 
arts, 

manufac- 
tures and 
com- 
merce. 



The sove- 
reigns 
endeav- 
oured to 
deprive 
the Pope 
of the 
disposal 
of the 
great 
benefices, 
and suc- 
ceeded, 
especially 
in France 
and Eng- 
land. 


Ever since 
the 

French 
clergy 
have been 
less de- 
voted to 
the Pope. 


756 the wealth of nations 

yoked and disgusted by the vanity, luxury, and expence of the 
richer clergy, who appeared to spend upon their own pleasures 
what had always before been regarded as the patrimony of the poor. 

In this situation of things, the sovereigns in the different states 
of Europe endeavoured to recover the influence which they had 
once had in the disposal of the great benefices of the church, by 
procuring to the deans and chapters of each diocese the restoration 
of their ancient right of electing the bishop, and to the monks of 
each abbacy that of electing the abbot. The re-establishing of this 
ancient order was the object of several statutes enacted in England 
during the course of the fourteenth century, particularly of what is 
called the statute of provisors; and of the Pragmatic sanction 
established in France in the fifteenth century. In order to render 
the election valid, it was necessary that the sovereign should both 
consent to it before-hand, and afterwards approve of the person 
elected; and though the election was still supposed to be free, he 
had, however, all the indirect means which his situation neces- 
sarily afforded him, of influencing the clergy in his own dominions. 
Other regulations of a similar tendency were established in other 
parts of Europe. But the power of the pope in the collation of the 
great benefices of the church seems, before the reformation, to have 
been nowhere so effectually and so universally restrained as in 
France and England. The Concordat afterwards, in the sixteenth 
century, gave to the kings of France the absolute right of present- 
ing to all the great, or what are called the consistorial benefices 
of the Galilean church.^^® 

Since the establishment of the Pragmatic sanction and of the 
Concordat, the clergy of France have in general shown less respect 
to the decrees of the papal court than the clergy of any other catho- 
lic country. In all the disputes which their sovereign has had with 
the pope, they have almost constantly taken party with the former. 
This independency of the clergy of France upon the court of Rome, 
seems to be principally founded upon the Pragmatic sanction and 
the Concordat. In the earlier periods of the monarchy, the clergy 
of France appear to have been as much devoted to the pope as 
those of any other country. When Robert, the second prince of the 
Capetian race, was most unjustly excommunicated by the court of 
Rome, his own servants, it is said, threw the victuals which came 
from his table to the dogs, and refused to taste any thing them- 
selves which had been polluted by the contact of a person in his 

These nine words are not in ed. i. 

Ed. I reads “great and consistorial.” 

Daniel, Histoire de France, 1755, tom. vii., pp. 158, 159; tom. ix., p. 40. 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 757 

situation.^'*^ They were taught to do so, it may very safely be pre- 
sumed, by the clergy of his own dominions. 

The claim of collating to the great benefices of the church, a 
claim in defence of which the court of Rome had frequently shaken, 
and sometimes overturned the thrones of some of the greatest sov- 
ereigns in Christendom, was in this manner either restrained or 
modified, or given up altogether, in many different parts of Europe, 
even before the time of the reformation. As the clergy had now less 
influence over the people, so the state had more influence over the 
clergy. The clergy therefore had both less power and less inclina- 
tion to disturb the state. 

The authority of the church of Rome was in this state of de- 
clension, when the disputes which gave birth to the reformation, 
began in Germany, and soon spread themselves through every part 
of Europe. The new doctrines were every where received with a 
high degree of popular favour. They were propagated with all that 
enthusiastic zeal which commonly animates the spirit of party, 
when it attacks established authority. The teachers of those doc- 
trines, though perhaps in other respects not more learned than 
many of the divines who defended the established church, seem in 
general to have been better acquainted with ecclesiastical history, 
and with the origin and progress of that system of opinions upon 
which the authority of the church was established, and they had 
thereby some advantage in almost every dispute. The austerity of 
their manners gave them authority with the common people, who 
contrasted the strict regularity of their conduct with the disorderly 
lives of the greater part of their own clergy. They possessed too in 
a much higher degree than their adversaries, all the arts of popu- 
larity and of gaining proselytes, arts which the lofty and dignified 
sons of the church had long neglected, as being to them in a great 
measure useless. The reason of the new doctrines recommended 
them to some, their novelty to many; the hatred and contempt of 
the established clergy to a still greater number; but the zealous, 
passionate, and fanatical, though frequently coarse and rustic, elo- 
quence with which they were almost every where inculcated, rec- 
ommended them to by far the greatest number. 

The success of the new doctrines was almost every where so 
great, that the princes who at that time happened to be on bad 

“II ne lui resta que deux domestiques pour le servir et lui preparer a 
manger, encore faisaient-ils passer par le feu les plats ou il mangeait, et les 
vases oil il buvait pour les purifier, comme ayant ete fouilles par un homme 
retranche de la communion des fiddles.”— /hzW., tom. iii., pp. 305, 306. Re- 
nault’s account is similar, Nouvel Ahrigi ckronologiquey 1768, tom. i., p. 
114, A.D. 996. 


So even 
before the 
Reforma- 
tion the 
clergy 
had less 
power 
and incli- 
nation to 
disturb 
the state. 

The Re- 
formation 
doctrines 
were re- 
com- 
mended 
to the 
common 
people 
by the 
zeal of 
their 
teachers, 


and en- 
abled 



sovereigns 

on bad 

terms 

with 

Rome to 

overturn 

the 

Church 

with 

ease, 


while in 
countries 
the sover- 
eigns of 
which 
were 
friendly 
to Rome 
the Re- 
formation 
was sup- 
pressed or 
ob- 
structed. 


In some 
countries 


758 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

terms with the court of Rome, were by means of them easily en- 
abled, in their own dominions, to overturn the church, which, hav- 
ing lost the respect and veneration of the inferior ranks of people, 
could make scarce any resistance. The court of Rome had dis- 
obliged some of the smaller princes in the northern parts of Ger- 
many, whom it had probably considered as too insignificant to be 
worth the managing. They universally, therefore, established the 
reformation in their own dominions. The tyranny of Christiern II. 
and of Troll, archbishop of Upsal, enabled Gustavus Vasa to expel 
them both from Sweden. The pope favoured the t 3 n:ant and the 
archbishop, and Gustavus Vasa found no difficulty in establishing 
the reformation in Sweden. Christiern 11. was afterwards deposed 
from the throne of Denmark, where his conduct had rendered him 
as odious as in Sweden. The pope, however, was still disposed to 
favour him, and Frederic of Holstein, who had mounted the throne 
in his stead, revenged himself by following the example of Gus- 
tavus Vasa. The magistrates of Berne and Zurich, who had no par- 
ticular quarrel with the pope, established with great ease the re- 
formation in their respective cantons, where just before some of 
the clergy had, by an imposture somewhat grosser than ordinary, 
rendered the whole order both odious and contemptible. 

In this critical situation of its affairs, the papal court was at 
sufficient pains to cultivate the friendship of the powerful sover- 
eigns of France and Spain, of whom the latter was at that time 
emperor of Germany, With their assistance it was enabled, though 
not without great difficulty and much bloodshed, either to suppress 
altogether, or to obstruct very much the progress of the reforma- 
tion in their dominions. It was well enough inclined too to be com- 
plaisant to the king of England. But from the circumstances of the 
times, it could not be so without giving offence to a still greater 
sovereign, Charles V, king of Spain and emperor of Germany. 
Henry VIII. accordingly, though he did not embrace himself the 
greater part of the doctrines of the reformation, was yet enabled, 
by their general prevalence, to suppress all the monasteries, and 
to abolish the authority of the church of Rome in his dominions. 
That he should go so far, though he went no further, gave some 
satisfaction to the patrons of the reformation, who having got pos- 
session of the government in the reign of his son and successor, com- 
pleted without any difficulty the work which Henry VIII. had 
begun. 

In some countries, as in Scotland, where the government was 
weak, unpopular, and not very firmly established, the reformation 

"®Ed. I reads “by the general prevalence of those doctrines.” 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 759 

was strong enough to overturn, not only the church, but the state 
likewise for attempting to support the church. 

Among the followers of the reformation, dispersed in all the dif- 
ferent countries of Europe, there was no general tribunal, which, 
like that of the court of Rome, or an oecumenical council, could 
settle all disputes among them, and with irresistible authority pre- 
scribe to all of them the precise limits of orthodoxy. When the fol- 
lowers of the reformation in one country, therefore, happened to 
differ from their brethren in another, as they had no common judge 
to appeal to, the dispute could never be decided; and many such 
disputes arose among them. Those concerning the government of 
the church, and the right of conferring ecclesiastical benefices, were 
perhaps the most interesting to the peace and welfare of civil so- 
ciety. They gave birth accordingly to the two principal parties or 
sects among the followers of the reformation, the Lutheran and 
Calvinistic sects, the only sects among them, of which the doctrine 
and discipline have ever yet been established by law in any part of 
Europe. 

The followers of Luther, together with what is called the church 
of England, preserved more or less of the episcopal government, 
established subordination among the clergy, gave the sovereign the 
disposal of all the bishoprics, and other consistorial benefices within 
his dominions, and thereby rendered him the real head of the 
church; and without depriving the bishop of the right of collating 
to the smaller benefices within his diocese, they, even to those 
benefices, not only admitted, but favoured the right of presentation 
both in the sovereign and in all other lay patrons. This system of 
church government was from the beginning favourable to peace 
and good order, and to submission to the civil sovereign. It has 
never, accordingly, been the occasion of any tumult or civil com- 
motion in any country in which it has once been established. The 
church of England in particular has always valued herself, with 
great reason, upon the unexceptionable loyalty of her principles. 
Under such a government the clergy naturally endeavour to rec- 
ommend themselves to the sovereign, to the court, and to the no- 
bility and gentry of the country, by whose influence they chiefly 
expect to obtain preferment. They pay court to those patrons, 
sometimes, no doubt, by the vilest flattery and assentation, but 
frequently too by cultivating all those arts which best deserve, 
and which are therefore most likely to gain them the esteem of 
people of rank and fortune; by their knowledge in all the different 
branches of useful and ornamental learning, by the decent liber- 
ality of their manners, by the social good humour of their conversa- 


the Re- 
formation 
over- 
turned 
both 
church 
and state. 

The fol- 
lowers of 
the Re- 
formation 
had no 
common 
authority 
like the 
court of 
Rome, 
and di- 
vided into 
Lutherans 
and Cal- 
vinists. 


The 
Luther- 
ans and 
the 

Church of 
England 
preferred 
episco- 
pacy, and 
gave the 
disposal 
of bene- 
fices to 
the sover- 
eign and 
other lay 
patrons. 



Zwing- 
lians and 
Calvinists 
gave the 
right of 
election 
to the 
people, 
and 
estab- 
lished 
equality 
among 
the clergy. 

Election 
by the 
people 
gave rise 
to great 
disorders, 


760 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

tion, and by their avowed contempt of those absurd and hypo- 
critical austerities which fanatics inculcate and pretend to practise, 
in order to draw upon themselves the veneration, and upon the 
greater part of men of rank and fortune, who avow that they do not 
practise them, the abhorrence of the common people. Such a clergy, 
however, while they pay their court in this manner to the higher 
ranks of life, are very apt to neglect altogether the means of main- 
taining their influence and authority with the lower. They are lis- 
tened to, esteemed and respected by their superiors; but before 
their inferiors they are frequently incapable of defending, effectu- 
ally and to the conviction of such hearers, their own sober and 
moderate doctrines against the most ignorant enthusiast who chuses 
to attack them. 

The followers of Zuinglius, or more properly those of Calvin, on 
the contrary, bestowed upon the people of each parish, whenever 
the church became vacant, the right of electing their own pastor; 
and established at the same time the most perfect equality among 
the clergy. The former part of this institution, as long as it re- 
mained in vigour, seems to have been productive of nothing but 
disorder and confusion, and to have tended equally to corrupt the 
morals both of the clergy and of the people. The latter part seems 
never to have had any effects but what were perfectly agreeable. 

As long as the people of each parish preserved the right of elect- 
ing their own pastors, they acted almost always under the influence 
of the clergy, and generally of the most factious and fanatical of 
the order. The clergy, in order to preserve their influence in those 
popular elections, became, or affected to become, many of them, 
fanatics themselves, encouraged fanaticism among the people, and 
gave the preference almost always to the most fanatical candidate. 
So small a matter as the appointment of a parish priest occasioned 
almost always a violent contest, not only in one parish, but in all 
the neighbouring parishes, who seldom failed to take part in the 
quarrel When the parish happened to be situated in a great city, 
it divided all the inhabitants into two parties; and when that city 
happened either to constitute itself a little republic, or to be the 
head and capital of a little republic, as is the case with many of the 
considerable cities in Switzerland and Holland, every paltry dis- 
pute of this kind, over and above exasperating the animosity of all 
their other factions, threatened to leave behind it both a new 
schism in the church, and a new faction in the state. In those small 
republics, therefore, the magistrate very soon found it necessary, 
for the sake of preserving the public peace, to assume to himself 
Eds. I and 2 read “take party.” 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 76i 

the right of presenting to all vacant benefices. In Scotland, the most 
extensive country in which this presbyterian form of church gov- 
ernment has ever been established, the rights of patronage were 
in effect abolished by the act which established presbytery in the 
beginning of the reign of William That act at least put it in 
the power of certain classes of people in each parish, to pur- 
chase, for a very small price, the right of electing their own pastor. 
The constitution which this act established was allowed to subsist 
for about two and twenty years, but was abolished by the loth of 
queen Anne, ch. 12. on account of the confusions and disorders 
which this more popular mode of election had almost every where 
occasioned.^^"^ In so extensive a country as Scotland, however, a 
tumult in a remote parish was not so likely to give disturbance to 
government, as in a smaller state. The loth of queen Anne restored 
the rights of patronage. But though in Scotland the law gives the 
benefice without any exception to the person presented by the 
patron; yet the church requires sometimes (for she has not in this 
respect been very uniform in her decisions) a certain concurrence 
of the people, before she will confer upon the presentee what is 
called the cure of souls, or the ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the 
parish. She sometimes at least, from an affected concern for the 
peace of the parish, delays the settlement till this concurrence can 
be procured. The private tampering of some of the neighbouring 
clergy, sometimes to procure, but more frequently to prevent this 
concurrence, and the popular arts which they cultivate in order to 
enable them upon such occasions to tamper more effectually, are 
perhaps the causes which principally keep up whatever remains 
of the old fanatical spirit, either in the clergy or in the people of 
Scotland. 

The equality which the presbyterian form of church govern- 
ment establishes among the clergy, consists, first, in the equality of 
authority or ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and, secondly, in lie equal- 
ity of benefice. In all presbyterian churches the equality of author- 
ity is perfect: that of benefice is not so. The difference, however, 
between one benefice and another, is seldom so considerable as 
commonly to tempt tie possessor even of the small one to pay 

“*The “Act concerning Patronages” sard of the second session of the 
first parliament of William and Mary, is doubtless meant, but this is a ^pa- 
rate Act from the “Act ratifying the Confession of Faith and settling Pres- 
byterian Church Government,” Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, 1822, 

vol ix , pp. I 33 j 196- , , . o . „ 

The preamble of the Act mentions “the great hardship upon the patrons 
as well as the “great heats and divisions” 

““Ed I reads “small benefice” 


and after 
trial was 
abolished 
in Scot- 
land, 
though 
the con- 
currence 
of the ^ 
people is 
still re- 
quired. 


The 

equality 
of the 
Presby- 
terian 
clergy 
makes 
them in- 
dependent 



and re- 
spectable. 


The medi- 
ocrity of 
their 
benefices 
gives 
them in- 
fluence 
with the 
common 
people. 


It also en- 
ables the 
universi- 
ties to 


762 the wealth oe nations 

court to his patron, by the vile arts of flattery and assentation, in 
order to get a better. In all the presbyterian churches, where the 
rights of patronage are thoroughly established, it is by nobler and 
better arts that the established clergy in general endeavour to 
gain the favour of their superiors; by their learning, by the irre- 
proachable regularity of their life, and by the faithful and diligent 
discharge of their duty. Their patrons even frequently complain of 
the independency of their spirit, which they are apt to construe 
into ingratitude for past favours, but which at worst, perhaps, is 
seldom any more than that indifference which naturally arises from 
the consciousness that no further favours of the kind are ever to be 
expected. There is scarce perhaps to be found any where in Eu- 
rope a more learned, decent, independent, and respectable set of 
men, than the greater part of the presbyterian clergy of Holland, 
Geneva, Switzerland, and Scotland. 

Where the church benefices are all nearly equal, none of them 
can be very great, and this mediocrity of benefice, though it may 
no doubt be carried too far, has, however, some very agreeable ef- 
fects. Nothing but the most exemplary morals can give dignity to a 
man of small fortune. The vices of levity and vanity necessarily 
render him ridiculous, and are, besides, almost as ruinous to him as 
they are to the common people. In his own conduct, therefore, he is 
obliged to follow that system of morals which the common people 
respect the most. He gains their esteem and affection by that plan 
of life which his own interest and situation would lead him to fol- 
low. The common people look upon him with that kindness with 
which we naturally regard one who approaches somewhat to our 
own condition, but who, we think, ought to be in a higher. Their 
kindness naturally provokes his kindness. He becomes careful to 
instruct them, and attentive to assist and relieve them. He does not 
even despise the prejudices of people who are disposed to be so 
favourable to him, and never treats them with those contemptuous 
and arrogant airs which we so often meet with in the proud digni- 
taries of opulent and well-endowed churches. The presbyterian 
clergy, accordingly, have more influence over the minds of the 
common people than perhaps the clergy of any other established 
church. It is accordingly in presbyterian countries only that we 
ever find the common people converted, without persecution, com- 
pletely, and almost to a man, to the established church. 

In countries where church benefices are the greater part of them 
very moderate, a chair in a university is generally a better estab- 
lishment than a church benefice. The universities have, in this case, 
the picking and chusing of their members from all the churchmen 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 7^3 

of the country, who, in every country, constitute by far the most draw on 
numerous class of men of letters. Where church benefices, on the 
contrary, are many of them very considerable, the church natu- sors, who 
rally draws from the universities the greater part of their eminent 
men of letters; who generally find some patron who does himself 
honour by procuring them church preferment. In the former situ- men of 
ation we are likely to find the universities filled with the most 
eminent men of letters that are to be found in the country. In the 
latter we are likely to find few eminent men among them, and those 
few among the youngest members of the society, who are likely too 
to be drained away from it, before they can have acquired ex- 
perience and knowledge enough to be of much use to it. It is ob- 
served by Mr. de Voltaire, that father Porree, a jesuit of no great 
eminence in the republic of letters, was the only professor they had 
ever had in France whose works were worth the reading.^^^ In a 
country which has produced so many eminent men of letters, it 
must appear somewhat singular, that scarce one of them should 
have been a professor in a university. The famous Gassendi was, 
in the beginning of his life, a professor in the university of Aix. 

Upon the first dawning of his genius, it was represented to him, 
that by going into the church he could easily find a much more 
quiet and comfortable subsistence, as well as a better situation for 
pursuing his studies; and he immediately followed the advice. The 
observation of Mr. de Voltaire may be applied, I believe, not only 
to France, but to all other Roman catholic countries. We very 
rarely find, in any of them, an eminent man of letters who is a pro- 
fessor in a university, except, perhaps, in the professions of law 
and physic; professions from which the church is not so likely to 
draw them. After the church of Rome, that of England is by far 
the richest and best endowed church in Christendom. In England, 
accordingly, the church is continually draining the universities of 
all their best and ablest members; and an old college tutor who is 
known and distinguished in Europe as an eminent man of letters, 
is as rarely to be found there as in any Roman catholic countr}. 

In Geneva, on the contrary, in the protestant cantons of Switzer- 
land, in the protestant countries of Germany, in Holland, in Scot- 
land, in Sweden, and Denmark, the most eminent men of letters 
whom those countries have produced, have, not all indeed, but the 

“^Voltaire’s expression is not quite so strong as it is represented. He says 
in the catalogue of writers in the Sikk de Louis XIV. ^ “Poree (Charles) , 
ne en Normandie en 1675, Jesuite, du petit nombre des professeurs qui ont 
eu de la celebrite chez les gens du monde. Eloquent dans le gout de Seneque, 
poete et tres bel esprit. Son plus grand merite fut de faire aimer les lettres 
et la vertu a ses disciples. Mort en 1741.” 



Eminent 
men of 
letters in 
Greece 
and Rome 
were 
mostly 
teachers. 


The re- 
venue of 
the 

church 
except 
that part 
which 
arises 
from en- 
dowments 
is a 

branch of 
that of 


764 the wealth of nations 

far greater part of them, been professors in universities. In those 
countries the universities are continually draining the church of all 
its most eminent men of letters. 

It may, perhaps, be worth while to remark, that, if we except the 
poets, a few orators, and a few historians, the far greater part of 
the other eminent men of letters, both of Greece and Rome, appear 
to have been either public or private teachers; generally either of 
philosophy or of rhetoric. This remark will be found to hold true 
from the days of Lysias and Isocrates, of Plato and Aristotle, down 
to those of Plutarch and Epictetus, of Suetonius and Quintilian.^^® 
To impose upon any man the necessity of teaching, year after 
year, any particular branch of science, seems, in reality, to be the 
most effectual method of rendering him completely master of it 
himself. By being obliged to go every year over the same ground, if 
he is good for any thing, he necessarily becomes, in a few years, 
well acquainted with every part of it: and if upon any particular 
point he should form too hasty an opinion one year, when he comes 
in the course of his lectures to re-consider the same subject the year 
thereafter, he is very likely to correct it.^®^ As to be a teacher of 
science is certainly the natural employment of a mere man of let- 
ters; so is it likewise, perhaps, the education which is most likely 
to render him a man of solid learning and knowledge. The medi- 
ocrity of church benefices naturally tends to draw the greater part 
of men of letters, in the country where it takes place, to the em- 
ployment in which they can be the most useful to the public, and, 
at the same time, to give them the best education, perhaps, they are 
capable of receiving. It tends to render their learning both as solid 
as possible, and as useful as possible. 

The revenue of every established church, such parts of it ex- 
cepted as may arise from particular lands or manors, is a branch, 
it ought to be observed, of the general revenue of the state, which 
is thus diverted to a purpose very different from the defence of the 
state. The tythe, for example, is a real land-tax, which puts it out 
of the power of the proprietors of land to contribute so largely to- 
wards the defence of the state as they otherwise might be able to 
do. The rent of land, however, is, according to some, the sole fund, 
and according to others, the principal fund, from which, in all great 
monarchies, the exigencies of the state must be ultimately sup- 

Quaere as to Suetonius. Ed. i continues here “Several of those whom 
we do not know with certamty to have been public teachers appear to have 
been private tutors. Polybius, we know, was private tutor to Scipio ^mili- 
^us; Dionysius of Hahcamassus, there are some probable reasons for be- 
lieving, was so to the children of Marcus and Quintus Cicero.” 

The Lectures leave little doubt that this is a fragment of autobiography 



RELIGIOUS INSTRUCTION 7^5 

plied. The more of this fund that is given to the church, the less, it 
is evident, can be spared to the state. It may be laid down as a cer- 
tain maxim, that, all other things being supposed equal, the richer 
the church, the poorer must necessarily be, either the sovereign on 
the one hand, or the people on the other; and, in all cases, the less 
able must the state be to defend itself. In several protestant coun- 
tries, particularly in all the protestant cantons of Switzerland, the 
revenue which anciently belonged to the Roman catholic church, 
the tythes and church lands, has been found a fund sufficient, not 
only to afford competent salaries to the established clergy, but to 
defray, with little or no addition, all the other expences of the 
state. The magistrates of the powerful canton of Berne, in par- 
ticular, have accumulated out of the savings from this fund a very 
large sum, supposed to amount to several millions, part of which is 
deposited in a public treasure, and part is placed at interest in what 
are called the public funds of the different indebted nations of Eu- 
rope; chiefly in those of France and Great Britain. What may be 
the amount of the whole expence which the church, either of Berne, 
or of any other protestant canton, costs the state, I do not pretend 
to know. By a very exact account it appears, that, in 1755, the 
whole revenue of the clergy of the church of Scotland, including 
their glebe or church lands, and the rent of their manses or dwell- 
ing-houses, estimated according to a reasonable valuation, amount- 
ed only to 68,514?. sd.3;^. This very moderate revenue affords 

a decent subsistence to nine hundred and forty-four ministers. 
The whole expence of the church, including what is occasionally 
laid out for the building and reparation of churches, and of the 
manses of ministers, cannot well be supposed to exceed eighty or 
eighty-five thousand pounds a-year. The most opulent church in 
Christendom does not maintain better the uniformity of faith, the 
fervour of devotion, the spirit of order, regularity, and austere 
morals in the great body of the people, than this very poorly en- 
dowed church of Scotland, All the good effects, both civil and re- 
ligious, which an established church can be supposed to produce, 
are produced by it as completely as by any other. The greater part 
of the protestant churches of Switzerland, which in general are not 
better endowed than the church of Scotland, produce those effects 
in a still higher degree. In the greater part of the protestant can- 
tons, there is not a single person to be found who does not profess 
himself to be of the established church. If he professes himself to 
be of any other, indeed, the law obliges him to leave the canton. 
But so severe, or rather indeed so oppressive a law, could never 
have been executed in such free countries, had not the diligence of 


the 

state 


In some 
cantons 
of Swit- 
zerland 
the old 
revenue 
of the 
church 
now 

maintains 
both 
church 
and state. 


The 

whole re- 
venue of 
the 

Church oi 
Scotland 
is a tri- 
fling 
amount, 
but that 
church 
produces 
all pos- 
sible good 
effects. 


This is 
also true 
in a still 
higher 
degree of 
the Swiss 
Protes- 
tant 

churches. 



Large 
revenue 
is unsuit- 
able to 
the office 
of 

clergy- 

men. 


The ex- 
pense of 
support- 
ing the 
dignity 
of the 
sovereign 
increases 
as the ex- 
penditure 
of the 
people 
increases, 


and is 
greater in 
amon- 


766 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the clergy before-hand converted to the established church the 
whole body of the people, with the exception of, perhaps, a few in- 
dividuals only. In some parts of Switzerland, accordingly, where, 
from the accidental union of a protestant and Roman catholic 
country, the conversion has not been so complete, both religions are 
not only tolerated but established by law. 

The proper performance of every service seems to require that its 
pay or recompence should be, as exactly as possible, proportioned 
to the nature of the service. If any service is very much under-paid, 
it is very apt to suffer by the meanness and incapacity of the greater 
part of those who are employed in it. If it is very much over-paid, 
it is apt to suffer, perhaps, still more by their negligence and idle- 
ness. A man of a large revenue, whatever may be his profession, 
thinks he ought to live like other men of large revenues; and to 
spend a great part of his time in festivity, in vanity, and in dissipa- 
tion. But in a clergyman this train of life not only consumes the 
time which ought to be employed in the duties of his function, but 
in the eyes of the common people destroys almost entirely that sanc- 
tity of character which can alone enable him to perform those du- 
ties with proper weight and authority. 


Part IV 

Of the Expence of supporting the Dignity of the Sovereign 

Over and above the expence necessary for enabling the sover- 
eign to perform his several duties, a certain expence is requisite for 
the support of his dignity. This expence varies both with the differ- 
ent periods of improvement, and with the different forms of govern- 
ment. 

In an opulent and improved society, where all the different orders 
of people are growing every day more expensive in their houses, in 
their furniture, in their tables, in their dress, and in their equipage; 
it cannot well be expected that the sovereign should alone hold out 
against the fashion. He naturally, therefore, or rather necessarily 
becomes more expensive in all those different articles too. His dig- 
nity even seems to require that he should become so. 

As in point of dignity, a monarch is more raised above his sub- 
jects than the chief magistrate of any republic is ever supposed to 
be above his fellow-citizens; so a greater expence is necessary for 

Ed. s reads “expences but this seems to be a misprint or misreading 
suggested by the fact that several expenses have been mentioned. 



CONCLUSION 767 

supporting that higher dignity. We naturally expect more splendor arch> 
in the court of a king, than in the mansion-house of a doge or burgo- 
master. ^ 


CONCLUSION 


The expence of defending the society, and that of supporting the 
dignity of the chief magistrate, are both laid out for the general 
benefit of the whole society. It is reasonable, therefore, that they 
should be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society, 
all the different members contributing, as nearly as possible, in pro- 
portion to their respective abilities. 

The expence of the administration of justice too, may, no doubt, 
be considered as laid out for the benefit of the whole society. There 
is no impropriety, therefore, in its being defrayed by the general 
contribution of the whole society. The persons, however, who give 
occasion to this expence are those who, by their injustice in one 
way or another, make it necessary to seek redress or protection 
from the courts of justice. The persons again most immediately 
benefited by this expence, are those whom the courts of justice 
either restore to their rights, or maintain in their rights. The ex- 
pence of the administration of justice, therefore, may very properly 
be defrayed by the particular contribution of one or other, or both 
of those two different sets of persons, according as different occa- 
sions may require, that is, by the fees of court. It cannot be neces- 
sary to have recourse to the general contribution of the whole so- 
ciety, except for the conviction of those criminals who have not 
themselves any estate or fund sufficient for paying those fees. 

Those local or provincial expences of which the benefit is local 
or provincial (what is laid out, for example, upon the police of a 
particular town or district) ought to be defrayed by a local or pro- 
vincial revenue, and ought to be no burden upon the general rev- 
enue of the society. It is unjust that the whole society should con- 
tribute towards an expence of which the benefit is confined to a 
part of the society. 

The expence of maintaining good roads and communications is, 
no doubt, beneficial to the whole society, and may, therefore, with- 
out any injustice, be defrayed by the general contribution of the 
whole society. This expence, however, is most immediately and di- 
rectly beneficial to those who travel or carry goods from one place 
to another, and to those who consume such goods. The turnpike 
tolls in England, and the duties called peages in other countries, lay 
it altogether upon those two different sets of people, and thereby 


The ex- 
pense of 
defence 
and of 
maintain- 
ing the 
dignity 
of the 
sovereign 
should be 
paid by 
general 
contribu^ 
tion. 

But the 
expense 
of justice 
may be 
defrayed 
by fees of 
court, 


and ex- 
penses of 
local 
benefit 
ought to 
be de- 
frayed by 
local 
revenue. 

The ex- 
pense of 
roads 
may not 
unjustly 
be de- 
frayed hy 
general 
contribu- 
tion, but 



better by 
tolls. 

The ex- 
pense of 
education 
and reli- 
gious in- 
struction 
may also 
be de- 
frayed by 
general 
contribu- 
tion, but 
better by 
fees and 
voluntary 
contribu- 
tion. 

Any defi- 
ciencies in 
the re- 
venue of 
institu- 
tions 
beneficial 
to the 
whole so- 
ciety must 
be made 
up by 
general 
contribu- 
tion. 


768 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

discharge the general revenue of the society from a very consider- 
able burden. 

The expence of the institutions for education and religious in- 
struction, is likewise, no doubt, beneficial to the whole society, and 
may, therefore, without injustice, be defrayed by the general con- 
tribution of the whole society. This expence, however, might per- 
haps with equal propriety, and even with some advantage, be de- 
frayed altogether by those who receive the immediate benefit of 
such education and instruction, or by the voluntary contribution of 
those who think they have occasion for either the one or the other. 

When the institutions or public works which are beneficial to the 
whole society, either cannot be maintained altogether, or are not 
maintained altogether by the contribution of such particular mem- 
bers of the society as are most immediately benefited by them, the 
deficiency must in most cases be made up by the general contribu- 
tion of the whole society. The general revenue of the society, over 
and above defraying the expence of defending the society, and of 
supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, must make up for 
the deficiency of many particular branches of revenue. The sources 
of this general or public revenue, I shall endeavour to explain in 
the following chapter. 





CHAPTER II 


OF THE SOURCES OF THE GENERAL OR PUBLIC REVENUE 
OF THE SOCIETY 

The revenue which must defray, not only the expence of defending 
the society and of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, 
but all the other necessary expences of government, for which the 
constitution of the state has not provided any particular revenue, 
may be drawn, either, first, from some fund which peculiarly be- 
longs to the sovereign or commonwealth, and which is independent 
of the revenue of the people; or, secondly, from the revenue of the 
people. 


Part I 

0/ the Funds or Sources of Revenue which muy peculiarly belong 
to the Sovereign or Commonwealth 

The funds or sources of revenue which may peculiarly belong to 
the sovereign or commonwealth must consist, either in stock, or in 
land. 

The sovereign, like any other owner of stock, may derive a rev- 
enue from it, either by employing it himself, or by lending it. His 
revenue is in the one case profit, in the other interest. 

The revenue of a Tartar or Arabian chief consists in profit. It 
arises principally from the milk and increase of his own herds and 
flocks, of which he himself superintends the management, and is 
the principal shepherd or herdsman of his own horde or tribe. It is, 
however, in this earliest and rudest state of civil government only 
that profit has ever made the principal part of the public revenue 
of a monarchical state. 

Small republics have sometimes derived a considerable revenue 
from the profit of mercantile projects. The republic of Hamburgh 
is said to do so from the profits of a public wine cellar and apothe- 

769 


All rev- 
enue 
comes 
from one 
of two 
sources: 
(i) pro- 
perty be- 
longing to 
the sover- 
eign; {%) 
the rev- 
enue of 
the 

people. 


The 

property 
may be in 
stock or 
land. 

Revenue 

from 

stock may 
be profit 
or inter- 
est. 

Tartar 
and Ara- 
bian 
chiefs 
make pro- 
fit from 
herds and 
flocks, 



Hamburg 
from a 
wine cel- 
lar and 
apothe- 
cary’s 
shop, and 
many 
states 
from 
banks 


and post 
offices. 


7/0 the WEALTjp OF NATIONS 

Gary’s shop.^ The state cannot be very great of which the sovereign 
has leisure to carry on the trade of a wine merchant or apothecary. 
The profit of a public bank has been a source of revenue to more 
considerable states. It has been so not only to Hamburgh, but to 
Venice and Amsterdam. A revenue of this kind has even by some 
people been thought not below the attention of so great an empire 
as that of Great Britain. Reckoning the ordinary dividend of the 
bank of England at five and a half per cent, and its capital at ten 
millions seven hundred and eighty thousand pounds, the neat an- 
nual profit, after paying the expence of management, must amount, 
it is said, to five hundred and ninety-two thousand nine hundred 
pounds. Government, it is pretended, could borrow this capital at 
three per cent, interest, and by taking the management of the bank 
into its own hands, might make a clear profit of two hundred and 
sixty-nine thousand five hundred pounds a year. The orderly, vigi- 
lant, and parsimonious administration of such aristocracies as those 
of Venice and Amsterdam, is extremely proper, it appears from ex- 
perience, for the management of a mercantile project of this kind. 
But whether such a government as that of England; which, what- 
ever may be its virtues, has never been famous for good ceconomy; 
which, in time of peace, has generally conducted itself with the 
slothful and negligent profusion that is perhaps natural to monarch- 
ies; and in time of war has constantly acted with all the thought- 
less extravagance that democracies are apt to fall into; could be 
safely trusted with the management of such a project, must at least 
be a good deal more doubtful. 

The post office is properly a mercantile project. The government 
advances the expence of establishing the different offices, and of 
buying or hiring the necessary horses or carriages, and is repaid 
with a large profit by the duties upon what is carried. It is perhaps 
the only mercantile project which has been successfully managed 
by, I believe, every sort of government. The capital to be advanced 

^See Memoires concernant les Droits & Impositions en Europe, tome i. 
page 73. This work was compiled by the order of the court for the use of a 
commission employed for some years past in considering the proper means 
for reforming the finances of France. The account of the French taxes, which 
takes up three volumes in quarto, may be regarded as perfectly authentic. 
That of those of other European nations was compiled from such informa- 
tions as the French ministers at the different courts could procure. It is 
much shorter, and probably not quite so exact as that of the French taxes. 
The book is by Moreau de Beaumont, Paris, 1768-9, 4 vols. 4to. The coirect 
title of voL i. is Memoires concernant ks Impositions et Droits en Europe; 
vols. ii.-iv. are Mimoires concernant Us Impositions et Droits^ 2de. Ptie., 
Impositions et Droits en France. Smith obtained his copy through Turgot, 
and attached great value to it, believing it to be very rare. See Bonar, Cata^ 
logue, p. 10. 



FUNDS OF THE SOVEREIGN 77 i 

is not very considerable. There is no mystery in the business. The 
returns are not only certain, but immediate. 

Princes, however, have frequently engaged in many other mer- 
cantile projects, and have been willing, like private persons, to 
mend their fortunes by becoming adventurers in the common 
branches of trade. They have scarce ever succeeded. The profusion 
with which the affairs of princes are aways managed, renders it al- 
most impossible that they should. The agents of a prince regard the 
wealth of their master as inexhaustible; are careless at which price 
they buy; are eyeless at what price they sell; are careless at what 
expence they transport his goods from one place to another. Those 
agents frequently live with the profusion of princes, and sometimes 
too, in spite of that profusion, and by a proper method of making up 
their accounts, acquire the fortunes of princes. It was thus, as we 
are told by Machiavel, that the agents of Lorenzo of Medicis, not a 
prince of mean abilities, carried on his trade. The republic of Flor- 
ence was several times obliged to pay the debt into which their ex- 
travagance had involved him. He found it convenient, accordingly, 
to give up the business of merchant, the business to which his fam- 
ily had originally owed their fortune, and in the latter part of his 
life to employ both what remained of that fortune, and the revenue 
of the state of which he had the disposal, in projects and expences 
more suitable to his station.^ 

No two characters seem more inconsistent than those of trader 
and sovereign. If the trading spirit of the English East India com- 
pany renders them very bad sovereigns; the spirit of sovereignty 
seems to have rendered them equally bad traders. While they were 
traders only, they managed their trade successfully, and were able 
to pay from their profits a moderate dividend to the proprietors of 
their stock. Since they became sovereigns, with a revenue which, it 
is said, was originally more than three millions sterling, they have 
been obliged to beg the extraordinary assistance of government in 
order to avoid immediate bankruptcy.^ In their former situation, 
their servants in India considered themselves as the clerks of mer- 
chants: in their present situation, those servants consider them- 
selves as the ministers of sovereigns. 

A state may sometimes derive some part of its public revenue 
from the interest of money, as well as from the profits of stock. If it 
has amassed a treasure, it may lend a part of that treasure, either 
to foreign states, or to its own subjects. 


But gen- 
erally 
princes 
are un- 
successful 
as traders. 


The t\vo 
charac- 
ters are 
inconsist- 
ent. 


Treasure 
maybe 
lent to 
subjects 


® Hist, of Florence^ bk. viii., ad fin. 

Details are given above, p. 709, but that is in a passage which appears 
first in ed. 3. 



or foreign 
states: 

Berne 
lends to 
foreign 
states, 


Hamburg 
has a 
pawn- 
shop, 


Pennsyl- 
vania lent 
paper 
money on 
land se- 
curity. 


772 the wealth of nations 

The canton of Berne derives a considerable revenue by lending 
a part of its treasure to foreign states; that is, by placing it in the 
public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe, chiefly in 
those of France and England.^ The security of this revenue must 
depend, first, upon the security of the funds in which it is placed, or 
upon the good faith of the government which has the management 
of them; and, secondly, upon the certainty or probability of the 
continuance of peace with the debtor nation. In the case of a war, 
the very first act of hostility, on the part of the debtor nation, might 
be the forfeiture of the funds of its creditor. This policy of lending 
money to foreign states is, so far as I know, peculiar to the canton 
of Berne. 

The city of Hamburgh ® has established a sort of public pawn- 
shop, which lends money to the subjects of the state upon pledges 
at six per cent, interest. This pawn-shop or Lombard, as it is called, 
affords a revenue, it is pretended, to the state of a hundred and fifty 
thousand crowns, which, at four-and-sixpence the crown, amounts 
fo 33;7So^' sterling. 

The government of Pennsylvania, without amassing any treasure, 
invented a method of lending, not money indeed, but what is equiv- 
alent to money, to its subjects. By advancing to private people, at 
interest, and upon land security to double the value, paper bills of 
credit to be redeemed fifteen years after their date, and in the mean 
time made transferrable from hand to hand like bank notes, and de- 
clared by act of assembly to be a legal tender in all payments from 
one inhabitant of the province to another, it raised a moderate rev- 
enue, which went a considerable way towards defraying an annual 
expence of about 4,500^. the whole ordinary expence of that frugal 
and orderly government. The success of an expedient of this kind 
must have depended upon three different circumstances; first, upon 
the demand for some other instrument of commerce, besides gold 
and silver money; or upon the demand for such a quantity of con- 
sumable stock, as could not be had without sending abroad the 
greater part of their gold and silver money, in order to purchase it; 
secondly, upon the good credit of the government which made use 
of this expedient; and, thirdly, upon the moderation with which it 
was used, the whole value of the paper bills of credit never exceed- 
ing that of the gold and silver money which would have been neces- 
sary for carrying on their circulation, had there been no paper bills 
of credit. The same expedient was upon different occasions adopted 

* Above, p. 765. 

®See Memoires concemant les Droits & Impositions en Europe; tome i. 
P. 73. 



FUNDS OF THE SOVEREIGN 773 

by several other American colonies: but, from want of this modera- 
tion, it produced, in the greater part of them, much more disorder 
than conveniency. 

The unstable and perishable nature of stock and credit, however, 
render them unfit to be trusted to, as the principal funds of that 
sure, steady and permanent revenue, which can alone give security 
and dignity to government. The government of no great nation, that 
was advanced beyond the shepherd state, seems ever to have de- 
rived the greater part of its public revenue from such sources. 

Land is a fund of a more stable and permanent nature; and the 
rent of public lands, accordingly, has been the principal source of 
the public revenue of many a great nation that was much advanced 
beyond the shepherd state. From the produce or rent of the public 
lands, the ancient republics of Greece and Italy derived, for a long 
time, the greater part of that revenue which defrayed the necessary 
expences of the commonwealth. The rent of the crown lands con- 
stituted for a long time the greater part of the revenue of the an- 
cient sovereigns of Europe. 

War and the preparation for war, are the two circumstances 
which in modern times occasion the greater part of the necessary ex- 
pence of all great states. But in the ancient republics of Greece and 
Italy every citizen was a soldier, who both served and prepared 
himself for service at his own expence. Neither of those two circum- 
stances, therefore, could occasion any very considerable expence to 
the state. The rent of a very moderate landed estate might be fully 
sufficient for defraying all the other necessary expences of govern- 
ment. 

In the ancient monarchies of Europe, the manners and customs 
of the times sufficiently prepared the great body of the people for 
war; and when they took the field, they were, by the condition of 
their feudal tenures, to be maintained, either at their own expence, 
or at that of their immediate lords, without bringing any new charge 
upon the sovereign. The other expences of government were, the 
greater part of them, very moderate. The administration of justice, 
it has been shown, instead of being a cause of expence, was a source 
of revenue. The labour of the country people, for three days before 
and for three days after harvest, was thought a fund sufficient for 
making and maintaining all the bridges, highways, and other public 
works which the commerce of the country was supposed to require. 
In those days the principal expence of the sovereign seems to have 
consisted in the maintenance of his own family and houshold. The 
officers of his houshold, accordingly were then the great officers of 
state. The lord treasurer received his rents. The lord steward and 


No great 
revenue 
can be de- 
rived 
from such 
a source. 


Revenue 
from land 
is much 
more im- 
portant, 


especially 
when war 
cost little, 
as in 
ancient 
Greece 
and Italy, 


and in 

feudal 

times, 

when all 

expenses 

were 

small. 



The pres- 
ent rent 
of all the 
land in 
the coun- 
try would 
not suf- 
fice for 
the ordi- 
nary ex- 
penditure 


774 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

lord chamberlain looked after the expence of his family. The care 
of his stables was committed to the lord constable and the lord 
marshal. His houses were all built in the form of castles, and seem to 
have been the principal fortresses which he possessed. The keepers 
of those houses or castles might be considered as a sort of military 
governors. They seem to have been the only military officers whom 
it was necessary to maintain in time of peace. In these circum- 
stances the rent of a great landed estate might, upon ordinary occa- 
sions, very well defray all the necessary expences of government. 

In the present state of the greater part of the civilized monarchies 
of Europe, the rent of all the lands in the country, managed as they 
probably would be if they all belonged to one proprietor, would 
scarce perhaps amount to the ordinary revenue which they levy 
upon the people even in peaceable times. The ordinary revenue of 
Great Britain, for example, including not only what is necessary for 
defraying the current expence of the year, but for paying the inter- 
est of the public debts, and for sinking a part of the capital of those 
debts, amounts to upwards of ten millions a year. But the land tax, 
at four shillings in the pound, falls short of two millions a year. 
This land tax, as it is called, however, is supposed to be one-fifth, 
not only of the rent of all the land, but of that of all the houses, and 
of the interest of all the capital stock of Great Britain, that part of 
it only excepted which is either lent to the public, or employed as 
farming stock in the cultivation of land. A verv considerable part 
of the produce of this tax arises from the rent of houses, and the in- 
terest of capital stock. The land-tax of the city of London, for ex- 
ample, at four shillings in the pound, amounts to 123,399/!. 6^. yrf. 
That of the city of Westminster, to 63,092^. $d. That of the pal- 

aces of Whitehall and St. James’s, to 30,754^. 6^. 3^.® A certain pro- 
portion of the land-tax is in the same manner assessed upon all the 
other cities and towns corporate in the kingdom, and arises almost 
altogether, either from the rent of houses, or from what is supposed 
to be the interest of trading and capital stock. According to the es- 
timation, therefore, by which Great Britain is rated to the land-tax, 
the whole mass of revenue arising from the rent of all the lands, 
from that of all the houses, and from the interest of all the capital 
stock, that part of it only excepted which is either lent to the public, 
or employed in the cultivation of land, does not exceed ten millions 
sterling a year, the ordinary revenue which government levies upon 
the people even in peaceable times. The estimation by which Great 
Britain is rated to the land-tax is, no doubt, taking the whole king- 
dom at an average, very much below the real value; though in sev- 

® The figures are those of the Land Tax Acts. 



FUNDS OF THE SOVEREIGN 775 

eral particular counties and districts it is said to be nearly equal to 
that value. The rent of the lands alone, exclusive of that of houses, 
and of the interest of stock, has by many people been estimated at 
twenty millions, an estimation made in a great measure at random, 
and which, I apprehend, is as likely to be above as below the truth.'^ 
But if the lands of Great Britain, in the present state of their culti- 
vation, do not afford a rent of more than tw^enty millions a year, 
they could not well afford the half, most probably not the fourth 
part of that rent, if they all belonged to a single proprietor, and 
were put under the negligent, expensive, and oppressive manage- 
ment of his factors and agents. The crown lands of Great Britain 
do not at present afford the fourth part of the rent, which could 
probably be drawn from them if they were the property of private 
persons. If the crown lands were more extensive, it is probable they 
would be still worse managed. 

The revenue which the great body of the people derives from 
land is in proportion, not to the rent, but to the produce of the land. 
The whole annual produce of the land of every country, if we except 
what is reserved jor seed, is either annually consumed by the great 
body of the people, or exchanged for something else that is con- 
sumed by them. Whatever keeps down the produce of the land be- 
low what it would otherwise rise to, keeps down the revenue of the 
great body of the people, still more than it does that of the pro- 
prietors of land. The rent of land, that portion of the produce which 
belongs to the proprietors, is scarce an3rwhere in Great Britain sup- 
posed to be more lian a third part of the whole produce. If the land, 
which in one state of cultivation affords a rent of ten millions ster- 
ling a year, would in another afford a rent of twenty millions; the 
rent being, in both cases, supposed a third part of the produce; the 
revenue of the proprietors would be less than it otherwise might 
be by ten millions a year only; but the revenue of the great body of 
the people would be less than it otherwise might be by thirty mil- 
lions a year, deducting only what would be necessary for seed. The 
population of the country would be less by the number of people 
which thirty millions a year, deducting always the seed, could main- 
tain, according to the particular mode of living and expence which 
might take place in the different ranks of men among whom the re- 
mainder was distributed. 

Though there is not at present, in Europe, any civilized state of 
any kind which derives the greater part of its public revenue from 
the rent of lands which are the property of the state; yet, in all the 


but if the 
whole of 
the land 
of the 
country 
were 

under the 
extrava- 
gant man- 
agement 
of the 
state, the 
rent 

would be 
much re- 
duced, 

and the 
revenue 
of the 
people 
would be 
reduced 
by a still 
greater 
amount. 


The sale 
of crown 
lands 
would 


^ See on these estimates Sir Robert Giffen, Growth of Capital, 1889, pp. 
89, 90. 



benefit 

both 

sovereign 

and 

people. 


The rev- 
enue from 
crown 
lands 
costs the 
people 
more than 
any other. 


Public 
parks, 
etc., are 
the only 
lands 
which 
should 
belong to 
the sover- 
eign. 

The 
greater 
part of 


776 the wealth of nations 

great monarchies of Europe, there are still many large tracts of land 
which belong to the crown. They are generally forest; and some- 
times forest where, after travelling several miles, you will scarce 
find a single tree; a mere waste and loss of country in respect both 
of produce and population. In every great monarchy of Europe the 
sale of the crown lands would produce a very large sum of money, 
which, if applied to the payment of the public debts, would deliver 
from mortgage a much greater revenue than any which those lands 
have ever afforded to the crown. In countries where lands, improved 
and cultivated very highly, and yielding at the time of sale as great 
a rent as can easily be got from them, commonly sell at thirty years 
purchase; the unimproved, uncultivated, and low-rented crown 
lands might well be expected to sell at forty, fifty, or sixty years 
purchase. The crown might immediately enjoy the revenue which 
this great price would redeem from mortgage. In the course of a few 
years it would probably enjoy another revenue. When the crown 
lands had become private property, they would, in the course of a 
few years, become well-improved and well-cultivated. The increase 
of their produce would increase the population of the country, by 
augmenting the revenue and consumption of the people. But the 
revenue which the crown derives from the duties of customs and ex- 
cise, would necessarily increase with the revenue and consumption 
of the people. 

The revenue which, in any civilized monarchy, the crown derives 
from the crown lands, though it appears to cost nothing to individ- 
uals, h reality costs more to the society than perhaps any other 
equal revenue which the crown enjoys. It would, in all cases, be for 
the Interest of the society to replace this revenue to the crown by 
some other equal revenue, and to divide the lands among the peo- 
ple, which could not well be done better, perhaps, than by exposing 
them to public sale. 

Lands, for the purposes of pleasure and magnificence, parks, gar- 
dens, public walks, &c. possessions which are every where consid- 
ered as causes of expence, not as sources of revenue, seem to be the 
only lands which, in a great and civilized monarchy, ought to belong 
to the crown. 

Public stock and public lands, therefore, the two sources of rev- 
enue which may peculiarly belong to the sovereign or common- 
wealth, being both improper and insufficient funds for defraying the 
necessary expence of any great and civilized state; it remains that 
this expence must, the greater part of it, be defrayed by taxes of 
one kind or another; the people contributing a part of their own 



TAXES 777 

private revenue in order to make up a public revenue to the sover- 
eign or commonwealth. 


Part II 
Of Taxes 

The private revenue of individuals, it has been shewn in the first 
book of this Inquiry, arises ultimately from three different sources; 
Rent, Profit, and Wages. Every tax must finally be paid from some 
one or other of those three different sorts of revenue, or from all of 
them indifferently. I shall endeavour to give the best account I can, 
first, of those taxes which, it is intended, should fall upon rent; sec- 
ondly, of those which, it is intended, should fall upon profit; third- 
ly, of those which, it is intended, should fall upon wages; and, 
fourthly, of those which, it is intended, should fall indifferently 
upon all those three different sources of private revenue. The par- 
ticular consideration of each of these four different sorts of taxes 
will divide the second part of the present chapter into four articles, 
three of which will require several other subdivisions, hlany of 
those taxes, it will appear from the following review, are not finally 
paid from the fund, or source of revenue, upon which it was intend- 
ed they should fall. 

Before I enter upon the examination of particular taxes, it is nec- 
essary to premise the four following maxims with regard to taxes in 
general. 

1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the 
support of the government, as nearly as possible, in proportion to 
their respective abilities; that is, in proportion to the revenue which 
they respectively enjoy under the protection of the state. The ex- 
pence of government to the individuals of a great nation, is like the 
expence of management to the joint tenants of a great estate, who 
are all obliged to contribute in proportion to their respective inter- 
ests in the estate. In the observation or neglect of this maxim con- 
sists, what is called the equality or inequality of taxation. Every 
tax, it must be observed once for all, which falls finally upon one 
only of the three sorts of revenue above mentioned, is necessarily 
unequal, in so far as it does not affect the other two. In the follow- 
ing examination of different taxes I shall seldom take much further 
notice of this sort of inequality, but shall, in most cases, confine my 
observations to that inequality which is occasioned by a particular 
tax falling unequally even upon that particular sort of private rev- 
enue which is affected by it. 


the sover- 
eign’s ex- 
pense 
must be 
defrayed 
by taxes. 


Taxes 
may be 
intended 
to fall on 
rent, pro- 
fit, or 
wages, or 
upon all 
three 
sorts of 
revenue. 


There are 
four 
maxims 
with re- 
gard to 
taxes in 
general, 

(i) equal- 
ity, 



(2) cer- 
tainty. 


(3) con- 
venience 
of pay- 
ment, 


and (4) 
economy 
in collec- 
tion, 


77S THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

II. The tax which each individual is bound to pay ought to be 
certain, and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of 
pa 5 nnent, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain to 
the contributor, and to every other person. Where it is otherwise, 
every person subject to the tax is put more or less in the power of 
the tax-gatherer, who can either aggravate the tax upon any ob- 
noxious contributor, or extort, by the terror of such aggravation, 
some present or perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of taxation 
encourages the insolence and favours the corruption of an order of 
men who are naturally unpopular, even where they are neither in- 
solent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each individual ought to 
pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great importance, that a very con- 
siderable degree of inequality, it appears, I believe, from the experi- 
ence of all nations, is not near so great an evil as a very small degree 
of uncertainty. 

III. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, 
in which it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay 
it. A tax upon the rent of land or of houses, payable at the same 
term at which such rents are usually paid, is levied at the time when 
it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay; or, 
when he is most likely to have wherewithal to pay. Taxes upon such 
consumable goods as are articles of luxury, are all finally paid by 
the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very convenient 
for him. He pays them by little and little, as he has occasion to buy 
the goods. As he is at liberty too, either to buy, or not to buy, as he 
pleases, it must be his own fault if he ever suffers any considerable 
inconveniency from such taxes. 

IV. Every tax ought to be so contrived as both to take out and to 
keep out of the pockets of the people as little as possible, over and 
above what it brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax may 
either take out or keep out of the pockets of the people a great deal 
more than it brings into the public treasury, in the four following 
ways. First, the levying of it may require a great number of officers, 
whose salaries may eat up the greater part of the produce of the tax, 
and whose perquisites may impose another additional tax upon the 
people. Secondly, it may obstruct the industry of the people, and 
discourage them from applying to certain branches of business 
which might give maintenance and employment to great multitudes. 
While it obliges the people to pay, it may thus diminish, or perhaps 
destroy, some of the funds which might enable them more easily to 
do so. Thirdly, by the forfeitures and other penalties which those 
unfortunate individuals incur who attempt unsuccessfully to evade 
the tax, it may frequently ruin them, and thereby put an end to the 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF LAND 779 

benefit which the community might have received from the employ- 
ment of their capitals. An injudicious tax offers a great temptation 
to smuggling. But the penalties of smuggling must rise in propor- 
tion to the temptation. The law, contrary to all the ordinary prin- 
ciples of justice, first creates the temptation, and then punishes 
those who yield to it; and it commonly enhances the punishment 
too in proportion to the very circumstance which ought certainly to 
alleviate it, the temptation to commit the crime.^ Fourthly, by sub- 
jecting the people to the frequent visits and the odious examination 
of the tax-gatherers, it may expose them to much unnecessary 
trouble, vexation, and oppression; and though vexation is not, 
strictly speaking, expence, it is certainly equivalent to the expence 
at which every man would be willing to redeem himself from it. It is 
in some one or other of these four different ways that taxes are fre- 
quently so much more burdensome to the people than they are bene- 
ficial to the sovereign. 

The evident justice and utility of the foregoing maxims have rec- 
ommended them more or less to the attention of all nations. All na- 
tions have endeavoured, to the best of their judgment, to render 
their taxes as equal as they could contrive; as certain, as conven- 
ient to the contributor, both in the time and in the mode of pay- 
ment, and in proportion to the revenue which they brought to the 
prince, as little burdensome to the people.^ The following short re- 
view of some of the principal taxes which have taken place in dif- 
ferent ages and countries will show, that the endeavours of all na- 
tions have not in this respect been equally successful. 

Article I 


Taxes upon Rent, Taxes upon the Rent of Land 
A TAX upon the rent of land may either be imposed according to a 

^ See Sketches of the History of Man 1774, by Henry Home, Lord Karnes, 
vol. i. page 474 & seq. This author at the place quoted gives six “general 
rules” as to taxation:— 

1. “That wherever there is an opportunity of smuggling taxes ought to be 
moderate.” 

2. “That taxes expensive in the levying ought to be avoided.” 

3. “To avoid arbitrary taxes.” _ 

4. “To remedy” inequality of riches “as much as posable, by relieving the 
poor and burdening the rich.” 

5. “That every tax which tends to impoverish the nation ought to be re- 
jected with indignation,” 

6. “To avoid taxes that require the oath of party.” 

^ In ed. I “as they could contrive” comes here instead of three lines earlier. 


which 
have re- 
com- 
mended 
them- 
selves to 
all na- 
tions. 



A tax on 
the rent 
of land 
may be on 
a constant 
or vari- 
able valu- 
ation. 

If on a 
constant 
valuation 
it be- 
comes un- 
equal, like 
the Brit- 
ish land 
tax. 


Circum- 
stances 
have 
made the 


780 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

certain canon, every district being valued at a certain rent, which 
valuation is not afterwards to be altered; or it may be imposed in 
such a manner as to vary with every variation in the real rent of the 
land, and to rise or fall with the improvement or declension of its 
cultivation. 

A land-tax which, like that of Great Britain, is assessed upon 
each district according to^^ a certain invariable canon, though it 
should be equal at the time of its first establishment, necessarily be- 
comes unequal in process of time, according to the unequal degrees 
of improvement or neglect in the cultivation of the different parts of 
the country. In England, the valuation according to which the dif- 
ferent counties and parishes were assessed to the land-tax by the 
4th of William and Mary was very unequal even at its first estab- 
lishment. This tax, therefore, so far offends against the first of the 
four maxims above-mentioned. It is perfectly agreeable to the other 
three. It is perfectly certain. The time of payment for the tax, being 
the same as that for the rent, is as convenient as it can be to the con- 
tributor. Though the landlord is in all cases the real contributor, 
the tax is commonly advanced by the tenant, to whom the landlord 
is obliged to allow it in the payment of the rent. This tax is levied 
by a much smaller number of officers than any other which affords 
nearly the same revenue. As the tax upon each district does not rise 
with the rise of the rent, the sovereign does not share in the profits 
of the landlord’s improvements. Those improvements sometimes 
contribute, indeed, to the discharge of the other landlords of the 
district. But the aggravation of the tax, which this may sometimes 
occasion upon a particular estate, is always so very small, that it 
never can discourage those improvements,^^ nor keep down the 
produce of the land below what it would otherwise rise to. As it has 
no tendency to diminish the quantity, it can have none to raise the 
price of that produce. It does not obstruct the industry of the peo- 
ple. It subjects the landlord to no other inconveniency besides the 
unavoidable one of paying the tax. 

The advantage, however, which the landlord has derived from the 
invariable constancy of the valuation by which all the lands of 
Great Britain are rated to the land-tax, has been principally owing 

“ Ed. I reads “is imposed according to.” For the origin of the stereotyped 
assessment of the land tax, see Cannan, Hist, of Local Rates in England^ 
1896, pp. 114-119. 

Ed. 2 reads “They contribute.” 

“Ed. I, beginning after “the same revenue,” six lines higher up, reads “As 
the tax does not rise with the rise of the rent, the sovereign does not share 
in the profits of the landlord’s improvements. The tax therefore does not 
discourage those improvements.” 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF LAND 78l 

to some circumstances altogether extraneous to the nature of the 
tax. 

It has been owing in part to the great prosperity of almost every 
part of the country, the rents of almost all the estates of Great Brit- 
ain having, since the time w^hen this valuation was first established, 
been continually rising, and scarce any of them having fallen. The 
landlords, therefore, have almost all gained the difference between 
the tax which they would have paid, according to the present rent 
of their estates, and that which they actually pay according to the 
ancient valuation. Had the state of the country been different, had 
rents been gradually falling in consequence of the declension of cul- 
tivation, the landlords would almost all have lost this difference. In 
the state of things which has happened to take place since the revo- 
lution, the constancy of the valuation has been advantageous to the 
landlord and hurtful to the sovereign. In a different state of things 
it might have been advantageous to the sovereign and hurtful to the 
landlord. 

As the tax is made payable in money, so the valuation of the land 
is expressed in money. Since the establishment of this valuation the 
value of silver has been pretty uniform, and there has been no al- 
teration in the standard of the coin either as to weight or fineness. 
Had silver risen considerably in its value, as it seems to have done 
in the course of two centuries which preceded the discovery of 
the mines of America, the constancy of the valuation might have 
proved very oppressive to the landlord. Had silver fallen consider- 
ably in its value, as it certainly did for about a century at least 
after the discovery of those mines, the same constancy of valuation 
would have reduced very much this branch of the revenue of the 
sovereign. Had any considerable alteration been made in the stand- 
ard of the money, either by sinking the same quantity of silver to a 
lower denomination, or by raising it to a higher; had an ounce of 
silver, for example, instead of being coined into five shillings and 
twopence, been coined, either into pieces which bore so low a de- 
nomination as two shillings and seven-pence, or into pieces which 
bore so high a one as ten shillings and four-pence, it would in the 
one case have hurt the revenue of the proprietor, in the other that 
of the sovereign. 

In circumstances, therefore, somewhat different from those which 
have actually taken place, this constancy of valuation mighty have 
been a very great inconveniency, either to the contributors, or to 
the commonwealth. In the course of ages such circumstances, how- 
ever, must, at some time or other, happen. But though empires, like 
all the other works of men, have all hitherto proved mortal, jet 


constant 
valuation 
favour- 
able to 
the Brit- 
ish land- 
lords, the 
country 
having 
prospered 
and rents 
risen, 


and the 
value of 
money 
and silver 
remained 
uniform. 


The con- 
stancy of 
valuation 
might 
have been 
very in- 
conve- 
nient to 



one or 
other of 
the 

parties. 


The 
French 
econo- 
mists re- 
commend 
a tax 
varying 
with the 
rent. 


In the 
Venetian 
territory 
rented 
lands are 
taxed 10 
per cent, 
and lands 
cultivated 
by the 
proprie- 
tor 8 per 
cent. 

Such a 
land tax 
is more 
equal but 
is not so 
certain, 
and is 
more 
trouble- 
some and 
expensive 
than the 
British. 

The un- 
certainty 


782 the wealth of nations 

every empire aims at immortality. Every constitution, therefore, 
which it is meant should be as permanent as the empire itself, ought 
to be convenient, not in certain circumstances only, but in all cir- 
cumstances; or ought to be suited, not to those circumstances which 
are transitory, occasional, or accidental, but to those which are nec- 
essary and therefore always the same. 

A tax upon the rent of land which varies with every variation of 
the rent, or which rises and falls according to the improvement or 
neglect of cultivation, is recommended by that sect of men of letters 
in France, who call themselves the (economists, as the most equit- 
able of all taxes. All taxes, they pretend, fall ultimately upon the 
rent of land, and ought therefore to be imposed equally upon the 
fund which must finally pay them. That all taxes ought to fall as 
equally as possible upon the fund which must finally pay them, is 
certaidy true. But without entering into the disagreeable discussion 
of the metaphysical arguments by which they support their very in- 
genious theory, it will sufficiently appear, from the following review, 
what are the taxes which fall finally upon the rent of the land, and 
what are those which fall finally upon some other fund. 

In the Venetian territory all the arable lands which are given in 
lease to farmers are taxed at a tenth of the rent.^^ The leases are re- 
corded in a public register which is kept by the officers of revenue 
in each province or district. When the proprietor cultivates his own 
lands, they are valued according to an equitable estimation, and he 
is allowed a deduction of one-fifth of the tax, so that for such lands 
he pays only eight instead of ten per cent, of the supposed rent. 

A land-tax of this kind is certainly more equal than the land-tax 
of England. It might not, perhaps, be altogether so certain, and the ' 
assessment of the tax might frequently occasion a good deal more 
trouble to the landlord. It might too be a good deal more expensive 
in the levying. 

Such a system of administration, however, might perhaps be con- 
trived as would, in a great measure, both prevent this uncertainty 
and moderate this expence. 

The landlord and tenant, for example, might jointly be obliged to 
record their lease in a public register. Proper penalties might be 
enacted against concealing or misrepresenting any of the condi- 
tions; and if part of those penalties were to be paid to either of the 
two parties who informed against and convicted the other of such 
concealment or misrepresentation, it would effectually deter them 
from combining together in order to defraud the public revenue. All 
“Memoires concemant les Droits tom. i. p. 240, 241. 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF LAND 7^3 

the conditions of the lease might be sufficiently known from such a 
record. 

Some landlords, instead of raising the rent, take a fine for the re- 
newal of the lease. This practice is in most cases the expedient of a 
spendthrift, who for a sum of ready money sells a future revenue of 
much greater value. It is in most cases, therefore, hurtful to the 
landlord. It is frequently hurtful to the tenant, and it is always 
hurtful to the community. It frequently takes from the tenant so 
great a part of his capital, and thereby diminishes so much his 
ability to cultivate the land, that he finds it more difficult to pay a 
small rent than it would otherwise have been to pay a great one. 
Whatever diminishes his ability to cultivate, necessarily keeps 
down, below what it would otherwise have been, the most impor- 
tant part of the revenue of the community. By rendering the tax 
upon such fines a good deal heavier than upon the ordinary rent, 
this hurtful practice might be discouraged, to the no small ad- 
vantage of all the different parties concerned, of the landlord, of 
the tenant, of the sovereign, and of the whole community. 

Some leases prescribe to the tenant a certain mode of cultiva- 
tion, and a certain succession of crops during the whole continu- 
ance of the lease. This condition, which is generally the effect of 
the landlord’s conceit of his own superior knowledge (a conceit in 
most cases very ill founded), ought always to be considered as 
an additional rent; as a rent in service instead of a rent in money. 
In order to discourage the practice, which is generally a foolish 
one, this species of rent might be valued rather high, and conse- 
quently taxed somewhat higher than common money rents. 

Some landlords, instead of a rent in money, require a rent in 
kind, in corn, cattle, poultry, wine, oil, &c. others again require a 
rent in service. Such rents are always more hurtful to the tenant 
than beneficial to the landlord. They either take more or keep more 
out of the pocket of the former, than they put into that of the lat- 
ter. In every country where they take place, the tenants are poor 
and beggarly, pretty much according to the degree in which they 
take place. By valuing, in the same manner, such rents rather high, 
and consequently taxing them somewhat higher than common 
money rents, a practice which is hurtful to the whole community 
might perhaps be sufficiently discouraged. 

When the landlord chose to occupy himself a part of his own 
lands, the rent might be valued according to an equitable arbitra- 
tion of the farmers and landlords in the neighbourhood, and a mod- 
erate abatement of the tax might be granted to him, in the same 
manner as in the Venetian territory; provided the rent of the lands 


and ex- 
pense 
could be 
dimi- 
nished 

Leases 
should be 
registered 

fines 
taxed 
higher 
than rent, 


condi- 
tions of 
cultiva- 
tion 

should be 
discour- 
apd by 
high 

valuation, 


rents pay- 
able in 
kind 

should be 

valued 

high, 


and an 
abate- 
ment 
given to 
landlords 
cultivat- 



ing a cer- 
tain ex- 
tent of 
their land. 


Such 9. 
system 
would 
free the 
ta^ from 
inconve- 
nient un- 
certainty 
and en- 
courage 
improve- 
ment. 

The extra 
expense of 
levying 
the tax 
would be 
incon- 
siderable. 


The value 
of im- 
prove- 
ments 
should be 
for a fixed 
term 
exempt 
from tax- 
ation, 


784 the wealth of nations 

which he occupied did not exceed a certain sum. It is of im- 
portance that the landlord should be encouraged to cultivate a part 
of his own land. His capital is generally greater than that of the 
tenant, and with less skill he can frequently raise a greater produce. 
The landlord can afford to try experiments, and is generally dis- 
posed to do so. His unsuccessful experiments occasion only a mod- 
erate loss to himself. His successful ones contribute to the improve- 
ment and better cultivation of the whole country. It might be of 
importance, however, that the abatement of the tax should en- 
courage him to cultivate to a certain extent only. If the landlords 
should, the greater part of them, be tempted to farm the whole of 
their own lands, the country (instead of sober and industrious 
tenants, who are bound by their own interest to cultivate as well as 
their capital and skill will allow them) would be filled with idle 
and profligate bailiffs, whose abusive management would soon de- 
grade the cultivation, and reduce the annual produce of the land, 
to the diminution, not only of the revenue of their masters, but of 
the most important part of that of the whole society. 

Such a system of administration might, perhaps, free a tax of 
this kind from any degree of uncertainty which could occasion 
either oppression or inconveniency to the contributor; and might 
at the same time serve to introduce into the common management 
of land such a plan or policy, as might contribute a good deal to 
the general improvement and good cultivation of the country. 

The expence of levying a land-tax, which varied with every vari- 
ation of the rent, would no doubt be somewhat greater than that of 
levying one which was always rated according to a fixed valuation. 
Some additional expence would necessarily be incurred both by 
the different register offices which it would be proper to establish 
in the different districts of the country, and by the different valua- 
tions which might occasionally be made of the lands which the 
proprietor chose to occupy himself. The expence of all this, how- 
ever, might be very moderate, and much below what is incurred in 
the levying of many other taxes, which afford a very inconsiderable 
revenue in comparison of what might easily be drawn from a tax of 
this kind. 

The discouragement which a variable land-tax of this kind might 
give to the improvement of land, seems to be the most important 
objection which can be made to it. The landlord would certainly be 
less disposed to improve, when the sovereign, who contributed 
nothing to the expence, was to share in the profit of the improve- 
ment. Even this objection might perhaps be obviated by allowing 
the landlord, before he began his improvement, to ascertain, in con- 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF LAND 7S5 

junction with the officers of revenue, the actual value of his lands, 
according to the equitable arbitration of a certain number of land- 
lords and farmers in the neighbourhood, equally chosen by both 
parties; and by rating him according to this valuation for such a 
number of years, as might be fully sufficient for his complete in- 
demnification. To draw the attention of the sovereign towards the 
improvement of the land, from a regard to the increase of his own 
revenue, is one of the principal advantages proposed by this spe- 
cies of land-tax. Xhe term, therefore, allowed for the indemnifica- 
tion of the landlord, ought not to be a great deal longer than what 
was necessary for that purpose; lest the remoteness of the interest 
should discourage too much this attention. It had better, however, 
be somewhat too long than in any respect too short. No incitement 
to the attention of the sovereign can ever counterbalance the small- 
est discouragement to that of the landlord. The attention of the 
sovereign can be at best but a very general and vague considera- 
tion of what is likely to contribute to the better cultivation of the 
greater part of his dominions. The attention of the landlord is a 
particular and minute consideration of what is likely to be the most 
advantageous application of every inch of ground upon his es- 
tate. The principal attention of the sovereign ought to be to en- 
courage, by every means in his power, the attention both of the 
landlord and of the farmer; by allowing both to pursue their own 
interest in their own way, and according to their own judgment; by 
giving to both the most perfect security that they shall enjoy the 
full recompence of their own industry; and by procuring to both 
the most extensive market for every part of their produce, in con- 
sequence of establishing the easiest and safest communications 
both by land and by water, through every part of his own domin- 
ions, as well as the most unbounded freedom of exportation to the 
dominions of all other princes. 

If by such a system of administration a tax of this kind could and the 
be so managed as to give, not only no discouragement, but, on the 
contrary, some encouragement to the improvement of land, it does jittie m- 
not appear likely to occasion any other inconveniency to the land- conveni- 
lord, except always the unavoidable one of being obliged to pay the 
tax. 

In all the variations of the state of the society, in the improve- it would 
ment and in the declension of agriculture; in all the variations in adjust it- 

the value of silver, and in all those in the standard of the coin, a changef^ 

tax of this kind would, of its own accord and without any attention 
and would be equally just and equitable in all those different 
of government, readily suit itself to the actual situation of things, 



Some 
states 
make a 
survey 
and valu- 
ation for 
the land 
tax, 


for ex- 
ample, 
Prussia, 


Silesia, 


and 

Bohemia. 


Under the 
Prussian 
land tax 
the 

church 
lands are 
taxed 
higher 
than the 
rest; in 


786 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

changes. It would, therefore, be much more proper to be established 
as a perpetual and unalterable regulation, or as what is called a 
fundamental law of the commonwealth, than any tax which was 
always to be levied according to a certain valuation. 

Some states, instead of the simple and obvious expedient of a 
register of leases, have had recourse to the laborious and expensive 
one of an actual survey and valuation of all the lands in the coun- 
try. They have suspected, probably, that the lessor and lessee, in 
order to defraud the public revenue, might combine to conceal the 
real terms of the lease. Doomsday-book seems to* have been the re- 
sult of a very accurate survey of this kind. 

In the ancient dominions of the king of Prussia, the land-tax is 
assessed according to an actual survey and valuation, which is re- 
viewed and altered from time to time.^^ According to that valua- 
tion, the lay proprietors pay from twenty to twenty-five per cent, 
of their revenue. Ecclesiastics from forty to forty-five per cent. The 
survey and valuation of Silesia was made by order of the present 
king; it is said with great accuracy. According to that valuation, 
the lands belonging to the bishop of Breslaw are taxed at twenty- 
five per cent, of their rent. The other revenues of the ecclesiastics 
of both religions, at fifty per cent. The commanderies of the Teu- 
tonic order, and of that of Malta, at forty per cent. Lands held by a 
noble tenure, at thirty-eight and one-third per cent. Lands held by 
a base tenure, at thirty-five and one-third per cent.^^ 

The survey and valuation of Bohemia is said to have been the 
work of more than a hundred years. It was not perfected till after 
the peace of 1748, by the orders of the present empress queen.^® 
The survey of the dutchy of Milan, which was begun in the time 
of Charles VI., was not perfected till after 1760. It is esteemed one 
of the most accurate that has ever been made. The survey of Savoy 
and Piedmont was executed under the orders of the late king of 
Sardinia.^’' 

In the dominions of the king of Prussia the revenue of the church 
is taxed much higher than that of lay proprietors,^® The revenue of 
the church is, the greater part of it, a burden upon the rent of land. 
It seldom happens that any part of it is applied towards the im- 
provement of land; or is so employed as to contribute in any re- 
spect towards increasing the revenue of the great body of the 
people. His Prussian majesty had probably, upon that account, 
thought it reasonable, that it should contribute a good deal more to- 

^^Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tome i. p. 114, 115, 116, &c. 
pp. 117-119. 

^®Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tome i. p. 83, 84 and 79. 
p. 280, &c. also p. 287, &c. to 316. ^ As stated just above. 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF LAND 1^7 

wards relieving the exigencies of the state. In some countries the 
lands of the church are exempted from all taxes. In others they are 
taxed more lightly than other lands. In the dutchy of Milan, the 
lands which the church possessed before 1575, are rated to the tax 
at a third only of their value.^*^ 

In Silesia, lands held by a noble tenure are taxed three per cent, 
higher than those held by a base tenure. The honours and priv- 
ileges of different kinds annexed to the former, his Prussian majesty 
had probably imagined, would sufficiently compensate to the pro- 
prietor a small aggravation of the tax; while at the same time the 
humiliating inferiority of the latter would be in some measure al- 
leviated by being taxed somewhat more lightly. In other countries, 
the system of taxation, instead of alleviating, aggravates this in- 
equality. In the dominions of the king of Sardinia, and in those 
provinces of France which are subject to what is called the real or 
predial taille, the tax falls altogether upon the lands held by a base 
tenure. Those held by a noble one are exempted. 

A land-tax assessed according to a general survey and valuation, 
how equal soever it may be at first, must in the course of a very 
moderate period of time, become unequal. To prevent its becoming 
so would require the continual and painful attention of government 
to all the variations in the state and produce of every different 
farm in the country. The governments of Prussia, of Bohemia, of 
Sardinia, and of the dutchy of Milan, actually exert an attention of 
this kind; an attention so unsuitable to the nature of government, 
that it is not likely to be of long continuance, and which, if it is 
continued, will probably in the long-run occasion much more 
trouble and vexation than it can possibly bring relief to the con- 
tributors. 

In 1666, the generality of Montauban was assessed to the Real 
or predial taille according, it is said, to a very exact survey and 
valuation.^^ By 1727, this assessment had become altogether un- 
equal. In order to remedy this inconveniency, government has 
found no better expedient than to impose upon the whole generality 
an additional tax of a hundred and twenty thousand livres. This 
additional tax is rated upon all the different districts subject to the 
taille according to the old assessment. But it is levied only upon 
those which in the actual state of things are by that assessment un- 
der-taxed, and it is applied to the relief of those which by the same 
assessment are over-taxed. Two districts, for example, one of which 

Mimoiresy tom. i, p. 282. 

^ Misprinted “tallie” here and six lines lower down in eds. 2-5. 

^ Memoires concernant les Droits &c, tome ii. p. 139, &c. pp. 145-147* 


some 

states 

they are 

taxed 

lower 

than the 

rest. 

Differ- 
ences are 
often 
made be- 
tween 
land held 
by noble 
and base 
tenures. 


Aland 
tax as- 
sessed ac- 
cording to 
a general 
survey 
and valu- 
ation soon 
becomes 
unequal, 


as in 
Montau- 
ban. 



Taxes on 
the pro- 
duce are 
finally- 
paid by 
the land- 
lord, 


and are 
very un- 
equal 
taxes, 


788 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ought in the actual state of things to be taxed at nine hundred, the 
other at eleven hundred livres, are by the old assessment both taxed 
at a thousand livres. Both these districts are by the additional tax 
rated at eleven hundred livres each. But this additional tax is levied 
only upon the district under-charged, and it is applied altogether to 
the relief of that over-charged, which consequently pays only nine 
hundred livres. The government neither gains nor loses by the ad- 
ditional tax, which is applied altogether to remedy the inequalities 
arising from the old assessment. The application is pretty much 
regulated according to the discretion of the intendant of the gener- 
ality, and must, therefore, be in a great measure arbitrary. 

Taxes which are proportioned, not to the Rent, but to the Produce 
oj Land 

Taxes upon the produce of land are in reality taxes upon the rent; 
and though they may be originally advanced by the farmer, are 
finally paid by the landlord. When a certain portion of the produce 
is to be paid away for a tax, the farmer computes, as well as he can, 
what the value of this portion is, one year with another, likely to 
amount to, and he makes a proportionable abatement in the rent 
which he agrees to pay to the landlord. There is no farmer who does 
not compute beforehand what the church tythe, which is a land-tax 
of this kind, is, one year with another, likely to amount to. 

The tythe, and every other land-tax of liis kind, under the ap- 
pearance of perfect equality, are very unequal taxes; a certain por- 
tion of the produce being, in different situations, equivalent to a 
very different portion of the rent. In some very rich lands the prod- 
uce is so great, that the one half of it is fully sufficient to replace to 
the farmer his capital employed in cultivation, together with the 
ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. The other 
half, or, what comes to the same thing, the value of the other half, 
he could afford to pay as rent to the landlord, if there was no tythe. 
But if a tenth of the produce is taken from him in the way of tythe, 
he must require an abatement of the fifth part of his rent, other- 
wise he cannot get back his capital with the ordinary profit. In this 
case the rent of the landlord, instead of amounting to a half, or 
five-tenths of the whole produce, will amount only to four-tenths 
of it. In poorer lands, on the contrary, the produce is sometimes so 
small, and the expence of cultivation so great, that it requires four- 
fifths of the whole produce to replace to the farmer his capital with 
the ordinary profit. In this case, though there was no tythe, the rent 
of the landlord could amount to no more than one-fifth or two- 



TAXES ON THE PRODUCE OF LAND 7^9 

tenths of the whole produce. But if the farmer pays one-tenth of 
the produce in the way of tythe, he must require an equal abate- 
ment of the rent of the landlord, which will thus be reduced to one- 
tenth only of the whole produce. Upon the rent of rich lands, the 
tythe may sometimes be a tax of no more than one-fifth part, or 
four shillings in the pound; whereas upon that of poorer lands, it 
may sometimes be a tax of one-half, or of ten shillings in the pound. 

The tythe, as it is frequently a very unequal tax upon the rent, 
so it is always a great discouragement both to the improvements of 
the landlord and to the cultivation of the farmer. The one cannot 
venture to make the most important, which are generally the most 
expensive improvements; nor the other to raise the most valuable, 
which are generally too the most expensive crops; when the church, 
which lays out no part of the expence, is to share so very largely in 
the profit. The cultivation of madder was for a long time confined 
by the tythe to the United Provinces, which, being presbyterian 
countries, and upon that account exempted from this destructive 
tax, enjoyed a sort of monopoly of that useful dying drug against 
the rest of Europe. The late attempts to introduce the culture of 
this plant into England, have been made only in consequence of 
the statute which enacted that five shillings an acre should be re- 
ceived in lieu of all manner of tythe upon madder.^^ 

As through the greater part of Europe, the church, so in many 
different countries of Asia, the state, is principally supported by a 
land-tax, proportioned, not to the rent, but to the produce of the 
land. In China, the principal revenue of the sovereign consists in a 
tenth part of the produce of all the lands of the empire. This tenth 
part, however, is estimated so very moderately, that, in many prov- 
inces, it is said not to exceed a thirtieth part of the ordinary prod- 
uce. The land-tax or land-rent which used to be paid to the Ma- 
hometan government of Bengal, before that country fell into the 
hands of the English East India company, is said to have amounted 
to about a fifth part of the produce. The land-tax of ancient Egypt 
is said likewise to have amounted to a fifth part.^^ 

In Asia, this sort of land-tax is said to interest the sovereign in 
the improvement and cultivation of land.-^ The sovereigns of 
China, those of Bengal while under the Mahometan government, 
and those of ancient Egypt, are said accordingly to have been ex- 
tremely attentive to the making and maintaining of good roads and 
navigable canals, in order to increase, as much as possible, both 
the quantity and value of every part of the produce of the land, by 


which dis- 
courage 
both im- 
prove- 
ment and 
good cul- 
tivation. 


They 
form the 
principal 
revenue 
of the 
state in 
many 
Asiatic 
countries, 


and are 
said to 
interest 
the sover- 
eign in 
the im- 
prove- 
ment and 
cultiva- 


“^31 Geo. II., c. 12, continued by $ Geo. III., c. 18. 
Genesis xlvii. 26. Above, p. 647. 



tion of 

land 

there. 


They may 
be in kind 
or in 
money 

Collection 
in kind is 
quite un- 
suitable 
for public 
revenue. 


A money 
tax on 
produce 
maybe 
always 
the same 
or may 
vary with 
the mar- 
ket price 
of pro- 
duce. 


790 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

procuring to every part of it the most extensive maiket which their 
own dominions could afford. The tythe of the church is divided into 
such small portions, that no one of its proprietors can have any in- 
terest of this kind. The parson of a parish could never find his ac- 
count in making a road or canal to a distant part of the country, in 
order to extend the market for the produce of his own particular 
parish. Such taxes, when destined for the maintenance of the state, 
have some advantages which may serve in some measure to bal- 
ance their inconveniency. When destined for the maintenance of 
the church, they are attended with nothing but inconveniency. 

Taxes upon the produce of land may be levied, either in kind; or, 
according to a certain valuation, in money. 

The parson of a parish, or a gentleman of small fortune who 
lives upon his estate, may sometimes, perhaps, find some advantage 
in receiving, the one his tythe, and the other his rent, in kind. The 
quantity to be collected, and the district within which it is to be 
collected, are so small, that they both can oversee, with their own 
eyes, the collection and disposal of every part of what is due to 
them. A gentleman of great fortune, who lived in the capital, would 
be in danger of suffering much by the neglect, and more by the 
fraud of his factors and agents, if the rents of an estate in a distant 
province were to be paid to him in this manner. The loss of the sov- 
ereign, from the abuse and depredation of his tax-gatherers, would 
necessarily be much greater. The servants of the most careless pri- 
vate person are, perhaps, more under the eye of their master than 
those of the most careful prince; and a public revenue, which was 
paid in kind, would suffer so much from the mismanagement of the 
collectors, that a very small part of what was levied upon the peo- 
ple would ever arrive at the treasury of the prince. Some part of 
the public revenue of China, however, is said to be paid in this man- 
ner. The Mandarins and other tax-gatherers will, no doubt, find 
their advantage in continuing the practice of a payment which is 
so much more liable to abuse than any payment in money. 

A tax upon the produce of land which is levied in money, may be 
levied either according to a valuation which varies with all the va- 
riations of the market price; or according to a fixed valuation, a 
bushel of wheat, for example, being always valued at one and the 
same money price, whatever may be the state of the market. The 
produce of a tax levied in the former way, will vary only according 
to the variations in the real produce of the land according to the 
improvement or neglect of cultivation. The produce of a tax levied 
in the latter way will vary, not only according to the variations in 
the produce of the land, but according to both those in the value 



TAXES ON THE KENT OF HOUSES 79 ^ 

of the precious metals, and those in the quantity of those metals 
which is at different times contained in coin of the same denomina- 
tion. The produce of the former will always bear the same propor- 
tion to the value of the real produce of the land. The produce of 
the latter may, at different times, bear very different proportions 
to that value. 

When, instead either of a certain portion of the produce of land, 
or of the price of a certain portion, a certain sum of money is to be 
paid in full compensation for all tax or tythe; the tax becomes, in 
this case, exactly of the same nature with the land-tax of England. 
It neither rises nor falls with the rent of the land. It neither en- 
courages nor discourages improvement. The tythe in the greater 
part of those parishes which pay what is called a modus in lieu of 
all other tythe, is a tax of this kind. During the Mahometan gov- 
ernment of Bengal, instead of the payment in kind of the fifth 
part of the produce, a modus, and, it is said, a very moderate one, 
was established in the greater part of the districts or zemindaries of 
the country. Some of the servants of the East India company, 
under pretence of restoring the public revenue to its proper value, 
have, in some provinces, exchanged this modus for a payment in 
kind. Under their management this change is likely both to discour- 
age cultivation, and to give new opportunities for abuse in the col- 
lection of the public revenue, which has fallen very much below 
what it was said to have been, when it first fell under the manage- 
ment of the company. The servants of the company may, perhaps, 
have profited by this change, but at the expence, it is probable, 
both of their masters and of the country. 


Taxes upon the Rent of Bouses 

The rent of a house may be distinguished into two parts, of which 
the one may very properly be called the Building rent; the other is 
commonly called the Ground rent. 

The building rent is the interest or profit of the capital expended 
in building the house. In order to put the trade of a builder upon a 
level with other trades, it is necessary that this rent should be suf- 
ficient, first, to pay him the same interest which he would have got 
for his capital if he had lent it upon good security; and, secondly, 
to keep the house in constant repair, or, what comes to the same 
thing, to replace, within a certain term of years, the capital which 
had been employed in building it. The building rent, or the ordi- 


Wben a 
certain 
sum of 
money is 
to be paid 
in com- 
pensation 
for the 
tax it be- 
comes 
exactly 
like the 
English 
land tax. 


House 
rent con- 
sists of 
two parts, 

building 

rent, 


“Eds, 1-4 read “a fifth 



and 

ground 

rent. 


A taxon 
house rent 
paid by 
the ten- 
ant falls 
partly on 
the in- 
habitant 
and part- 
ly on the 
owner of 
the 

ground, 

as may be 
shown by 
an 

example 


792 the wealth of nations 

nary profit of building, is, therefore, every where regulated by the 
ordinary interest of money. Where the market rate of interest is 
four per cent, the rent of a house which, over and above paying the 
ground rent, affords six, or six and a half per cent, upon the whole 
expence of building, may perhaps afford a sufficient profit to the 
builder. Where the market rale of interest is five per cent., it may 
perhaps require seven or seven and a half per cent. If, in propor- 
tion to the interest of money, the trade of the builder affords at any 
time a much greater profit than this, it will soon draw so much cap- 
ital from other trades as will reduce the profit to its proper level. If 
it affords at any time much less than this, other trades will soon 
draw so much capital from it as will again raise that profit. 

Whatever part of ‘the whole rent of a house is over and above 
what is sufficient for affording this reasonable profit, naturally goes 
to the ground-rent; and where the owner of the ground and the 
owner of the building are two different persons, is, in most cases, 
completely paid to the former. This surplus rent is the price which 
the inhabitant of the house pays for some real or supposed advan- 
tage of the situation. In country houses, at a distance from any 
great town, where there is plenty of ground to chuse upon, the 
ground rent is scarce any thing, or no more than what the ground 
which the house stands upon would pay if employed in agriculture. 
In country villas in the neighbourhood of some great town, it is 
sometimes a good deal higher; and the peculiar conveniency or 
beauty of situation is there frequently very well paid for. Ground 
rents are generally highest in the capital, and in those particular 
parts of it where there happens to be the greatest demand for 
houses, whatever be the reason of tha.t demand, whether for trade 
and business, for pleasure and society, or for mere vanity and 
fashion. 

A tax upon house-rent, payable by the tenant and proportioned 
to the whole rent of each house, could not, for any considerable 
time at least, affect the building rent. If the builder did not get his 
reasonable profit, he would be obliged to quit the trade; which, by 
raising the demand for building, would in a short time bring back 
his profit to its proper level with that of other trades. Neither 
would such a tax fall altogether upon the ground-rent; but it would 
divide itself in such a manner as to fall, partly upon the inhabitant 
of the house, and partly upon the owner of the ground. 

Let us suppose, for example, that a particular person judges that 
he can afford for house-rent an expence of sixty pounds a year; and 
let us suppose too that a tax of four shillings in the pound, or of 
one-fifth, payable by the inhabitant, is laid upon house-rent. A 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF HOUSES 793 

house of sixty pounds rent will in this case cost him seventy-two 
pounds a year, which is twelve pounds more than he thinks he can 
afford. He will, therefore, content himself with a worse house, or a 
house of fifty pounds rent, which, with the additional ten pounds 
that he must pay for the tax, will make lip the sum of sixty pounds 
a year, the expence which he judges he can afford; and in order to 
pay the tax he will give up a part of the additional conveniency 
which he might have had from a house of ten pounds a year more 
rent. He will give up, I say, a part of this additional conveniency; 
for he will seldom be obliged to give up the whole, but will, in con- 
sequence of the tax, get a better house for fifty pounds a year, than 
he could have got if there had been no tax. For as a tax of this kind, 
by taking away this particular competitor, must diminish the com- 
petition for houses of sixty pounds rent, so it must likewise dimin- 
ish it for those of fifty pounds rent, and in the same manner for 
those of all other rents, except the lowest rent, for which it would 
for some time increase the competition. But the rents of every class 
of houses for which the competition was diminished, would neces- 
sarily be more or less reduced. As no part of this reduction, how- 
ever, could, for any considerable time at least, affect the building 
rent; the whole of it must in the long-run necessarily fall upon th^ 
ground-rent. The final payment of this tax, therefore, would fall, 
partly upon the inhabitant of the house, who, in order to pay his 
share, would be obliged to give up a part of his conveniency; and 
partly upon the owner of the ground, who, in order to pay his share, 
would be obliged to give up a part of his revenue. In what propor- 
tion this final payment would be divided between them, it is not 
perhaps very easy to ascertain. The division would probably be 
very different in different circumstances, and a tax of this kind 
might, according to those different circumstances, affect very un- 
equally both the inhabitant of the house and the owner of the 
ground. 

The inequality with which a tax of this kind might fall upon the On the 
owners of different ground-rents, would arise altogether from the 
accidental inequality of this division. But the inequality with which would be 
it might fall upon the inhabitants of different houses would arise, an un- 
not only from this, but from another cause. The proportion of the M- 
expence of house-rent to the whole expence of living, is different in ing’ 
the different degrees of fortune. It is perhaps highest in the highest 
degree, and it diminishes gradually through the inferior degrees, ^ 
so as in general to be lowest in the lowest degree. The necessaries 
of life occasion the great expence of the poor. They find it difficult 
to get food, and the greater part of their little revenue is spent in 



It would 
be like a 
tax on 
any other 
consum- 
able com- 
modity, it 
would be 
very 
much in 
propor- 
tion to 
men’s 
whole ex- 
pense, 
and it 
would 
produce 
consider- 
able re- 
venue. 


The rent 
could be 
easily 
ascer- 
tained. 
Empty 
houses 
should be 
exempt, 
and 


794 THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

getting it. The luxuries and vanities of life occasion the principal 
expence of the rich ; and a magnificent house embellishes and sets 
off to the best advantage all the other luxuries and vanities which 
they possess. A tax upon .house-rents, therefore, would in general 
fall heaviest upon the rich; and in this sort of inequality there 
would not, perhaps, be any thing very unreasonable. It is not very 
unreasonable that the rich should contribute to the public expence, 
not only in proportion to their revenue, but something more than 
in that proportion. 

The rent of houses, though it in some respects resembles the rent 
of land, is in one respect essentially different from it. The rent of 
land is paid for the use of a productive subject. The land which 
pays it produces it. The rent of houses is paid for the use of an un- 
productive subject. Neither the house nor the ground which it 
stands upon produce any thing. The person who pays the rent, 
therefore, must draw it from some other source of revenue, distinct 
from and independent of this subject.^® A tax upon the rent of 
houses, so far as it falls upon the inhabitants, must be drawn from 
the same source as the rent itself, and must be paid from their rev- 
enue, whether derived from the wages of labour, the profits of 
stock, or the rent of land. So far as it falls upon the inhabitants, it 
is one of those taxes which fall, not upon one only, but indifferently 
upon all the three different sources of revenue; and is in every re- 
spect of the same nature as a tax upon any other sort of consum- 
able commodities. In general there is not, perhaps, any one article 
of expence or consumption by which the liberality or narrowness 
of a man’s whole expence can be better judged of, than by his 
house-rent. A proportional tax upon this particular article of ex- 
pence might, perhaps, produce a more considerable revenue than 
any which has hitherto been drawn from it in any part of Europe. 
If the tax indeed was very high, the greater part of people would 
endeavour to evade it, as much as they could, by contenting them- 
selves with smaller houses, and by turning the greater part of their 
expence into some other channel. 

The rent of houses might easily be ascertained with sufficient ac- 
curacy, by a policy of the same kind with that which would be nec- 
essary for ascertaining the ordinary rent of land. Houses not in- 
habited ought to pay no tax. A tax upon them would fall altogether 
upon the proprietor, who would thus be taxed for a subject which 
afforded him neither conveniency nor revenue. Houses inhabited 
by the proprietor ought to be rated, not according to the expence 
which they might have cost in building, but according to the rent 
“Above, p. 264. 



TAXES ON THE RENT OF HOUSES 795 

which an equitable arbitration might judge them likely to bring, if 
leased to a tenant. If rated according to the expence which they 
may have cost in building, a tax of three or four shillings in the 
pound, joined with other taxes, would ruin almost all the rich and 
great families of this, and, I believe, of every other civilized coun- 
try. Whoever will examine, with attention, the different town and 
country houses of some of the richest and greatest families in this 
country, will find that, at the rate of only six and a half, or seven 
per cent, upon the original expence of building, their house-rent is 
nearly equal to the whole neat rent of their estates. It is the accu- 
mulated expence of several successive generations, laid out upon 
objects of great beauty and magnificence, indeed; but, in propor- 
tion to what they cost, of very small exchangeable value.^'^ 

Ground-rents are a still more proper subject of taxation than the 
rent of houses. A tax upon ground-rents would not raise the rents 
of houses. It would fall altogether upon the owner of the ground- 
rent, who acts always as a monopolist, and exacts the greatest rent 
which can be got for the use of his ground. More or less can be got 
for it according as the competitors happen to be richer or poorer, or 
can afford to gratify their fancy for a particular spot of ground at 
a greater or smaller expence. In every country the greatest number 
of rich competitors is in the capital, and it is there accordingly that 
the highest ground-rents are always to be found. As the wealth of 
those competitors would in no respect be increased by a tax upon 
ground-rents, they would not probably be disposed to pay more for 
the use of the ground. Whether the tax was to be advanced by the 
inhabitant, or by the owner of the ground, would be of little impor- 
tance. The more the inhabitant was obliged to pay for the tax, the 
less he would incline to pay for the ground; so that the final pay- 
ment of the tax would fall altogether upon the owner of the ground- 
rent. The ground-rents of uninhabited houses ought to pay no tax. 

Both ground-rents and the ordinary rent of land are a species of 
revenue which the owner, in many cases, enjoys without any care 
or attention of his own. Though a part of this revenue should be 
taken from him in order to defray the expences of the state, no dis- 
couragement will thereby be given to any sort of industry. The an- 
nual produce of the land and labour of the society, the real wealth 


^ Since the first publication of this book, a tax nearly upon the above- 
mentioned principles has been imposed. This note appears first in ed. 3. The 
tax was first imposed by 18 Geo. III., c. 26, and was at the rate of 6d. in 
the pound on houses of £$ and under £50 annual value, and is. in the pound 
on houses of higher value, but by 19 Geo. Ill,, c. 59, the rates were altered 
to 6d. in the pound on houses of £s and under £20 annual value, 9d. on 
those of £20 and under £40, and is. on those of £40 and upwards. 


houses 
occupied 
by their 
proprie- 
tor should 
be as- 
sessed at 
their let- 
ting 
value. 


Ground 
rent is a 
still more 
proper 
subject of 
taxation 
than 
building 
rent, 


as no dis- 
courage- 
ment is 
given to 
industry 
by the 
taxation 
of the 



rent of 
land. 


Ground 
rents are 
even a 
more 
proper 
subject of 
taxation * 
than or- 
dinary 
land 
rents. 


Ground 
rents are 
nowhere 
separately 
taxed, but 
might be. 


House 
rent is 
legally 
liable to 
the 

British 
land tax. 


796 the wealth of nations 

and revenue of the great body of the people, might be the same 
after such a tax as before. Ground-rents, and the ordinary rent of 
land, are, therefore, perhaps, the species of revenue which can best 
bear to have a peculiar tax imposed upon them. 

Ground-rents seem, in this respect, a more proper subject of pe- 
culiar taxation than even the ordinary rent of land. The ordinary 
rent of land is, in many cases, owing partly at least to the attention 
and good management of the landlord. A very heavy tax might dis- 
courage too much this attention and good management. Ground- 
rents, so far as they exceed the ordinary rent of land, are altogether 
owing to the good government of the sovereign, which, by protect- 
ing the industry either of the whole people, or of the inhabitants of 
some particular place, enables them to pay so much more than its 
real value for the ground which they build their houses upon; or to 
make to its owner so much more than compensation for the loss 
which he might sustain by this use of it. Nothing can be more rea- 
sonable than that a fund which owes its existence to the good gov- 
ernment of the state, should be taxed peculiarly, or should contrib- 
ute something more than the greater part of other funds, towards 
the support of that government. 

Though, in many different countries of Europe, taxes have been 
imposed upon the rent of houses, I do not know of any in which 
ground-rents have been considered as a separate subject of taxa- 
tion. The contrivers of taxes have, probably, found some difficulty 
in ascertaining what part of the rent ought to be considered as 
ground-rent, and what part ought to be considered as building- 
rent. It should not, however, seem very difficult to distinguish those 
two parts of the rent from one another. 

In Great Britain the rent of houses is supposed to be taxed in 
the same proportion as the rent of land, by what is called the an- 
nual land-tax. The valuation, according to which each different par- 
ish and district is assessed to this tax, is always the same. It was 
originally extremely unequal, and it still continues to be so. 
Through the greater part of the kingdom this tax falls still more 
lightly upon the rent of houses than upon that of land. In some few 
districts only, which were originally rated high, and in which the 
rents of houses have fallen considerably, the land-tax of three or 
four shillings in the pound, is said to amount to an equal proportion 
of the real rent of houses.^® Untenanted houses, though by law sub- 
ject to the tax, are, in most districts, exempted from it by the fa- 
vour of the assessors; and this exemption sometimes occasions 
some little variation in the rate of particular houses, though that of 

^Ed. 1 reads “the houses.” 



797 


TAXES ON THE RENT OF HOUSES 

the district is always the same. Improvements of rent, by new 
buildings, repairs, &c.; go to the discharge of the district, which 
occasions still further variations in the rate of particular houses.^^ 

In the province of Holland every house is taxed at two and a 
half per cent, of its value, without any regard either to the rent 
which it actually pays, or to the circumstance of its being tenanted 
or untenanted. There seems to be a hardship in obliging the pro- 
prietor to pay a tax for an untenanted house, from which he can 
derive no revenue, especially so very heavy a tax. In Holland, 
where the market rate of interest does not exceed three per cent, 
two and a half per cent, upon the whole value of the house, must, 
in most cases, amount to more than a third of the building-rent, 
perhaps of the whole rent. The valuation, indeed, according to 
which the houses are rated, though very unequal, is said to be al- 
ways below the real value. When a house is rebuilt, improved or 
enlarged, there is a new valuation, and the tax is rated accordingly. 

The contrivers of the several taxes which in England have, at 
different times, been imposed upon houses, seem to have imagined 
that there was some great difficulty in ascertaining, with tolerable 
exactness, what was the real rent of every house. They have regu- 
lated their taxes, therefore, according to some more obvious cir- 
cumstance, such as they had probably imagined would, in most 
cases, bear some proportion to the rent. 

The first tax of this kind was hearth-money; or a tax of two 
shillings upon every hearth. In order to ascertain how many 
hearths were in the house, it was necessary that the tax-gatherer 
should enter every room in it. This odious visit rendered the tax 
odious. Soon after the revolution, therefore, it was abolished as a 
badge of slavery. 

The next tax of this kind was, a tax of two shillings upon every 
dv/elling house inhabited. A house with ten windows to pay four 
shillings more. A house with twenty windows and upwards to pay 
eight shillings. This tax was afterwards so far altered, that houses 
with twenty windows, and with less than thirty, were ordered to 
pay ten shillings, and those with thirty windows and upwards to 
pay twenty shillings. The number of windows can, in most cases, be 
counted from the outside, and, in all cases, without entering every 
room in the house. The visit of the tax-gatherer, therefore, was less 
offensive in this tax than in the hearth-money. 

This tax was afterwards repealed, and in the room of it was es- 
tablished the window-tax, which has undergone too several altera- 

^Ed. I does not contain this sentence. 

“Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tom. i., p. 223. 


In Hol- 
land there 
is a tax on 
the capi- 
tal value 
of houses. 


House 
taxes in 
England 
have not 
been pro- 
portioned 
to the 
rent, 

but first 
to the 
number 
of 

hearths, 


and later 
to the 
number 
of 

windows. 


The pres- 
ent win- 



dow tax 
augments 
gradually 
from 2 d. 
per win- 
dow to 2S. 


Window 
taxes are 
objection- 
able, 

chiefly on 
the 

ground 
of in- 
equality. 


Taxes on 
houses 
lower 
rents. 


Profit is 
divided 
into in- 
terest and 
surplus 
over in- 
terest. 
The sur- 
plus is 
not tax- 
able. 


79S THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

tions and augmentations. The window-tax, as it stands at present 
(January, 1775), over and above the duty of three shillings upon 
every house in England, and of one shilling upon every house in 
Scotland, lays a duty upon every window, which, in England, aug- 
ments gradually from two-pence, the lowest rate, upon houses with 
not more than seven windows; to two shillings, the highest rate, 
upon houses with twenty-five windows and upwards. 

The principal objection to all such taxes is their inequality, an 
inequality of the worst kind, as they must frequently fall much 
heavier upon the poor than upon the rich. A house of ten pounds 
rent in a country town may sometimes have more windows than a 
house of five hundred pounds rent in London ; and though the in- 
habitant of the former is likely to be a much poorer man than that 
of the latter, yet so far as his contribution is regulated by the win- 
dow-tax, he must contribute more to the support of the state. Such 
taxes are, therefore, directly contrary to the first of the four max- 
ims above mentioned. They do not seem to offend much against any 
of the other three. 

The natural tendency of the window-tax, and of all other taxes 
upon houses, is to lower rents. The more a man pays for the tax, 
the less, it is evident, he can afford to pay for the rent. Since the 
imposition of the window-tax, however, the rents of houses have 
upon the whole risen, more or less, in almost every town and vil- 
lage of Great Britain, with which I am acquainted. Such has been 
almost every where the increase of the demand for houses, that it 
has raised the rents more than the window-tax could sink them; 
one of the many proofs of the great prosperity of the country, and 
of the increasing revenue of its inhabitants. Had it not been for 
the tax, rents would probably have risen still higher. 


Article II 

Taxes upon prop, or upon the Revenue arising from Stock 

The revenue or profit arising from stock naturally divides itself in- 
to two parts; that which pays the interest, and which belongs to 
the owner of the stock; and that surplus part which is over and 
above what is necessary for paying the interest. 

This latter part of profit is evidently a subject not taxable di- 
rectly. It is the compensation, and in most cases it is no more than 
a very moderate compensation, for the risk and trouble of employ- 
ing the stock. The employer must have this compensation, other- 



TAXES ON PROFITS IN GENERAL 799 

wise he cannot, consistently with his own interest, continue the 
employment. If he was taxed directly, therefore, in proportion to 
the whole profit, he would be obliged either to raise the rate of his 
orofit, or to charge the tax upon the interest of money; that is, to 
pay less interest. If he raised the rate of his profit in proportion to 
the tax, the whole tax, though it might be advanced by him, would 
be finally paid by one or other of two different sets of people, ac- 
cording to the different ways in which he might employ the stock 
of which he had the management. If he employed it as a farming 
stock in the cultivation of land, he could raise the rate of his profit 
only by retaining a greater portion, or, what comes to the same 
thing, the price of a greater portion of the produce of the land; and 
as this could be done only by a reduction of rent, the final payment 
of the tax would fall upon the landlord. If he employed it as a mer- 
cantile or manufacturing stock, he could raise the rate of his profit 
only by raising the price of his goods; in which case the final pay- 
ment of the tax would fall altogether upon the consumers of those 
goods. If he did not raise the rate of his profit, he would be obliged 
to charge the whole tax upon that part of it which was allotted for 
the interest of money. He could afford less interest for whatever 
stock he borrowed, and the whole weight of the tax would in this 
case fall ultimately upon the interest of money. So far as he could 
not relieve himself from the tax in the one way, he would be obliged 
to relieve himself in the other. 

The interest of money seems at first sight a subject equally cap- Interest 
able of being taxed directly as the rent of land. Like the rent of 
land, it is a neat produce which remains after completely compen- seems as 

sating the whole risk and trouble of employing the stock. As a tax fit to be 

upon the rent of land cannot raise rents; because the neat produce 
which remains after replacing the stock of the farmer, together with 
his reasonable profit, cannot be greater after the tax than before it: 
so, for the same reason, a tax upon the interest of money could not 
raise the rate of interest; the quantity of stock or money in the 
country, like the quantity of land, being supposed to remain the 
same after the tax as before it. The ordinary rate of profit, it has 
been shewn in the first book,^^ is every where regulated by the 
quantity of stock to be employed in proportion to the quantity of 
the employment, or of the business which must be done by it. But 
the quantity of the employment, or of the business to be done by 
stock, could neither be increased nor diminished by any tax upon 
the interest of money. If the quantity of the stock to be employed 
therefore, was neither increased nor diminished by it, the ordinary 

®^Chap ix. 



but it is 
not, since, 


(i) the 
amount 
received 
by an in- 
dividual 
cannot be 
readily 
and 
exactly 
ascer- 
tained, 


and (2) 
stock may 
be re- 
moved 
from the 
country 
imposing 
the tax. 


Wliere 
such a 
tax exists 
it is levied 
on a loose 


800 the wealth of nations 

rate of profit would necessarily remain the same. But the portion 
of this profit necessary for compensating the risk and trouble of 
the employer, would likewise remain the same; that risk and trou- 
ble being in no respect altered. The residue, therefore, that portion 
which belongs to the owner of the stock, and which pays the inter- 
est of money, would necessarily remain the same too. At first sight, 
therefore, the interest of money seems to be a subject as fit to be 
taxed directly as the rent of land. 

There are, however, two different circumstances which render 
the interest of money a much less proper subject of direct taxation 
than the rent of land. 

First, the quantity and value of the land which any man pos- 
sesses can never be a secret, and can always be ascertained with 
great exactness. But the whole amount of the capital stock which 
he possesses is almost always a secret, and can scarce ever be ascer- 
tained with tolerable exactness. It is liable, besides, to almost con- 
tinual variations. A year seldom passes away, frequently not a 
month, sometimes scarce a single day, in which it does not rise or 
fall more or less. An inquisition into every man’s private circum- 
stances, and an inquisition which, in order to accommodate the tax 
to them, watched over all the fluctuations of his fortune, would be 
a source of such continual and endless vexation as no people could 
support. 

Secondly, land is a subject which cannot be removed, whereas 
stock easily may. The proprietor of land is necessarily a citizen of 
the particular country in which his estate lies. The proprietor of 
stock is properly a citizen of the world, and is not necessarily at- 
tached to any particular country. He would be apt to abandon the 
country in which he was exposed to a vexatious inquisition, in or- 
der to be assessed to a burdensome tax, and would remove his stock 
to some other country where he could either carry on his business, 
or enjoy his fortune more at his ease. By removing his stock he 
would put an end to all the industry which it had maintained in the 
country which he left. Stock cultivates land; stock employs labour. 
A tax which tended to drive away stock from any particular coun- 
try, would so far tend to dry up every source of revenue, both to 
the sovereign and to the society. Not only the profits of stock, but 
the rent of land and the wages of labour, would necessarily be more 
or less diminished by its removal. 

The nations, accordingly, who have attempted to tax the revenue 
arising from stock, instead of any severe inquisition of this kind, 
have been obliged to content themselves with some very loose, and, 
therefore, more or less arbitrary estimation. The extr’eme inequality 



TAXES ON PROFITS IN GENERAL Soi 

and uncertainty of a tax assessed in this manner, can be compen- 
sated only by its extreme moderation, in consequence of which 
every man finds himself rated so very much below his real revenue, 
that he gives himself little disturbance though his neighbour should 
be rated somewhat lower. 

By what is called the land-tax in England, it was intended that 
stock should be taxed in the same proportion as land. When the tax 
upon land was at four shillings in the pound, or at one-fifth of the 
supposed rent, it was intended that stock should be taxed at one- 
fifth of the supposed interest. When the present annual land-tax 
was first imposed, the legal rate of interest was six per cent. Every 
hundred pounds stock, accordingly, was supposed to be taxed at 
twenty-four shillings, the fifth part of six pounds. Since the legal 
rate of interest has been reduced to five per cent.®^ every hundred 
pounds stock is supposed to be taxed at twenty shillings only. The 
sum to be raised, by what is called the land-tax, was divided be- 
tween the country and the principal towns. The greater part of it 
was laid upon the country; and of what was laid upon the towns, 
the greater part was assessed upon the houses. What remained to 
be assessed upon the stock or trade of the towns (for the stock up- 
on the land was not meant to be taxed) was very much below the 
real value of that stock or trade. Whatever inequalities, therefore, 
there might be in the original assessment, gave little disturbance. 
Every parish and district still continues to be rated for its land, its 
houses, and its stock, according to the original assessment; and the 
almost universal prosperity of the country, which in most places 
has raised very much the value of all these, has rendered those in- 
equalities of still less importance now. The rate too upon each dis- 
trict continuing always the same, the uncertainty of this tax, so far 
as it might be assessed upon the stock of any individual, has been 
very much diminished, as well as rendered of much less conse- 
quence. If the greater part of the lands of England are not rated to 
the land-tax at half their actual value, the greater part of the stock 
of England is, perhaps, scarce rated at the fiftieth part of its actual 
value. In some towns the whole land-tax is assessed upon houses; 
as in Westminster, where stock and trade are free. It is otherwise 
in London. 

In all countries a severe inquisition into the circumstances of 
private persons has been carefully avoided. 

At Hamburgh every inhabitant is obliged to pay to the state, 
one-fourth per cent, of all that he possesses; and as the wealth of 


and very 
low valu- 
ation, 


as under 
the Eng- 
lish land 
tax. 


Inquisi- 
tion is 
avoided. 
At Ham- 
burg each 


“ Above, pp. 88, 89. 

®®Memoires concemant les Droits, tome i. p. 74. 



inhabi- 
tant pri- 
vately 
assesses 
himself 
on oath. 


In some 

Swiss 

cantons 

each man 

assesses 

himself 

publicly, 


which 
would be 


802 the wealth of nations 

the people of Hamburgh consists principally in stock, this tax may 
be considered as a tax upon stock. Every man assesses himself, and, 
in the presence of the magistrate, puts annually into the public cof- 
fer a certain sum of money, which he declares upon oath to be one- 
fourth per cent, of all that he possesses, but without declaring what 
it amounts to, or being liable to any examination upon that sub- 
ject.®^ This tax is generally supposed to be paid with great fidelity. 
In a small republic, where the people have entire confidence in 
their magistrates, are convinced of the necessity of the tax for the 
support of the state, and believe that it will be faithfully applied to 
that purpose, such conscientious and voluntary payment may 
sometimes be expected. It is not peculiar to the people of Ham- 
burgh. 

The canton of Underwald in Switzerland is frequently ravaged 
by storms and inundations, and is thereby exposed to extraordi- 
nary expences. Upon such occasions the people assemble, and every 
one is said to declare with the greatest frankness what he is worth, 
in order to be taxed accordingly. At Zurich the law orders, that, in 
cases of necessity, every one should be taxed in proportion to his 
revenue; the amount of which, he is obliged to declare upon oath. 
They have no suspicion, it is said, that any of their fellow-citizens 
will deceive them. At Basil the principal revenue of the state arises 
from a small custom upon goods exported. All the citizens make 
oath that they will pay every three months all the taxes imposed by 
the law. All merchants and even all inn-keepers are trusted with 
keeping themselves the account of the goods which they sell either 
within or without the territory. At the end of every three months 
they send this account to the treasurer, with the amount of the tax 
computed at the bottom of it. It is not suspected that the revenue 
suffers by this confidence.®'^ 

To oblige every citizen to declare publicly upon oath the amount 
of his fortune, must not, it seems, in those Swiss cantons, be reck- 

^ The Memoires only say “La taille consiste dans le quart pour cent que 
tout habitant, sans exception, est oblige de payer de tout ce qu’il possede en 
meubles et immeubles. II ne se fait aucune repartition de cette tailie. Chaque 
bourgeois se cottise lui-m6me et porte son imposition a la maison de ville, 
et on n’exige autre chose de lui, sinon le serment qu’il est oblige de faire que 
ce qu’il paye forme v^ritablement ce qu’il doit acquitter.” But Lord Karnes, 
Sketches of the History of Mariy vol. i., p. 476, says, “Every merchant puts 
privately into the public chest, the sum that, in his own opinion, he ought 
to contribute.” 

^ Ed. I reads “Underwold.” 

Ed. 5 adds “it” here, doubtless a misprint. 

Memoires concernant les Droits, tome i. p. 163, 166, 171. The state- 
ments p to the confidence felt in these self-assessments are not taken from 
the Memoires. 



TAXES ON PARTICULAR PROFITS S03 

oned a hardship. At Hamburgh it would be reckoned the greatest. 
Merchants engaged in the hazardous projects of trade, all tremble 
at the thoughts of being obliged at all times to expose the real state 
of their circumstances. The ruin of their credit and the miscarriage 
of their projects, they foresee, would too often be the consequence. 
A sober and parsimonious people, who are strangers to all such 
projects, do not feel that they have occasion for any such conceal- 
ment. 

In Holland, soon after the exaltation of the late prince of Orange 
to the stadtholdership, a tax of two per cent, or the fiftieth penny, 
as it was called, was imposed upon the whole substance of every 
citizen. Every citizen assessed himself and paid his tax in the same 
manner as at Hamburgh; and it was in general supposed to have 
been paid with great fidelity. The people had at that time the 
greatest affection for their new government, which they had just 
established by a general insurrection. The tax was to be paid but 
once ; in order to relieve the state in a particular exigency. It was, 
indeed, too heavy to be permanent. In a country where the market 
rate of interest seldom exceeds three per cent., a tax of two per 
cent, amounts to thirteen shillings and fourpence in the pound up- 
on the highest neat revenue which is commonly drawn from stock. 
It is a tax which very few people could pay without encroaching 
more or less upon their capitals. In a particular exigency the people 
may, from great public zeal, make a great effort, and give up even 
a part of their capital, in order to relieve the state. But it is impos- 
sible that they should continue to do so for any considerable time; 
and if they did, the tax would soon ruin them so completely as to 
render them altogether incapable of supporting the state. 

The tax upon stock imposed by the land-tax bill in England, 
though it is proportioned to the capital, is not intended to diminish 
or take away any part of that capital. It is meant only to be a tax 
upon the interest of money proportioned to that upon the rent of 
land; so that when the latter is at four shillings in the pound, the 
former may be at four shillings in the pound too. The tax at Ham- 
burgh, and the still more moderate taxes of Underwald and Zurich, 
are meant, in the same manner, to be taxes, not upon the capital, 
but upon the interest or neat revenue of stock. That of Holland 
was meant to be a tax upon the capital. 


a hard- 
ship at 
Hamburg. 


Holland 
once 
adopted 
the Ham- 
burg 
practice. 


On that 
occasion 
the tax 
was 

meant to 
be a tax 
on the 
capital. 


Taxes upon the Profit of particular Employments 
In some countries extraordinary taxes are imposed upon the profits 



Taxes are 
some- 
times im- 
posed on 
particular 
profits, 

such as 
those on 
hawkers, 

* pedlars, 
etc. 

These fall 
not on the 
dealers 
but on the 
consum- 
ers of the 
goods, 


but when 
not pro- 
portioned 
to the 
trade of 
the dealer 
they op- 
press the 
small and 
favour 
the great 
dealer. 


804 the wealth of nations 

of stock; sometimes when employed in particular branches of 

trade, and sometimes when employed in agriculture. 

Of the former kind are in England the tax upon hawkers and 
pedlars, that upon hackney coaches and chairs, and that which the 
keepers of ale-houses pay for a licence to retail ale and spirituous 
liquors. During the late war, another tax of the same kind was pro- 
posed upon shops.^® The war having been undertaken, it was said, 
in defence of the trade of the country, the merchants, who were to 
profit by it, ought to contribute towards the support of it. 

A tax, however, upon the profits of stock employed in any par- 
ticular branch of trade, can never fall finally upon the dealers (who 
must in all ordinary cases have their reasonable profit, and, where 
the competition is free, can seldom have more than that profit), 
but always upon the consumers, who must be obliged to pay in the 
price of the goods the tax which the dealer advances; and gener- 
ally with some overcharge. 

A tax of this kind when it is proportioned to the trade of the 
dealer, is finally paid by the consumer, and occasions no oppression 
to the dealer. When it is not so proportioned, but is the same upon 
all dealers, though in this case too it is finally paid by the consum- 
er, yet it favours the great, and occasions some oppression to the 
small dealer. The tax of five shillings a week upon every hackney 
coach, and that of ten shillings a year upon every hackney chair, so 
far as it is advanced by the different keepers of such coaches and 
chairs, is exactly enough proportioned to the extent of their re- 
spective dealings. It neither favours the great, nor oppresses the 
smaller dealer. The tax of twenty shillings a year for a licence to 
sell ale; of forty shillings for a licence to sell spirituous liquors; 
and of forty shillings more for a licence to sell wine, being the same 
upon all retailers, must necessarily give some advantage to the 
great, and occasion some oppression to the small dealers. The for- 
mer must find it more easy to get back the tax in the price of their 
goods than the latter. The moderation of the tax, however, renders 
this inequality of less importance, and it may to many people ap- 
pear not improper to give some discouragement to the multiplica- 
tion of little ale-houses. The tax upon shops, it was intended, should 
be the same upon all shops. It could not well have been otherwise. 
It would have been impossible to proportion with tolerable exact- 
ness the tax upon a shop to the extent of the trade carried on in it, 
without such an inquisition as would have been altogether insup- 
portable in a free country. If the tax had been considerable, it 

‘^Proposed by Legge in 1759. See Do^vell, History of Taxation and Taxes 
in England f 1884, voL ii., p. 137. 



TAXES ON PARTICULAR PROFITS 2^5 

would have oppressed the small, and forced almost the whole retail 
trade into the hands of the great dealers. The competition of the 
former being taken away, the latter would have enjoyed a monop- 
oly of the trade; and like all other monopolists would soon have 
combined to raise their profits much beyond what was necessary for 
the payment of the tax. The final pa3nnent, instead of falling upon 
the shopkeeper, would have fallen upon the consumer, with a con- 
siderable over-charge to the profit of the shopkeeper. For these rea- 
sons, the project of a tax upon shops was laid aside, and in the room 
of it was substituted the subsidy 1759. 

What in France is called the personal taille is, perhaps, the most 
important tax upon the profits of stock employed in agriculture 
that is levied in any part of Europe. 

In the disorderly state of Europe during the prevalence of the 
feudal government, the sovereign was obliged to content himself 
with taxing those who were too weak to refuse to pay taxes. The 
great lords, though willing to assist him upon particular emergen- 
cies, refused to subject themselves to any constant tax, and he was 
not strong enough to force them. The occupiers of land all over 
Europe were, the greater part of them, originally bond-men. 
Through the greater part of Europe they were gradually emanci- 
pated. Some of them acquired the property of landed estates which 
they held by some base or ignoble tenure, sometimes under the 
king, and sometimes under some other great lord, like the ancient 
copy-holders of England. Others, without acquiring the property, 
obtained leases for terms of years, of the lands which they occupied 
under their lord, and thus became less dependent upon him. The 
great lords seem to have beheld the degree of prosperity and inde- 
pendency which this inferior order of men had thus come to enjoy, 
with a malignant and contemptuous indignation, and willingly 
consented that the sovereign should tax them.^^ In some countries 
this tax was confined to the lands which were held in property by 
an ignoble tenure; and, in this case, the taille was said to be real. 
The land-tax established by the late king of Sardinia, and the taille 
in the provinces of Languedoc, Provence, Dauphine, and Brit- 
tany; in the generality of Montauban, and in the elections of Agen 
and Condom, as well as in some other districts of France, are taxes 
upon lands held in property by an ignorble tenure.^^ In other coun- 
tries the tax was laid upon the supposed profits of all those who 
held in farm or lease lands belonging to other people, whatever 
might be the tenure by which the proprietor held them; and in this 

^Ed. I does not contain “a.” 

"Above, p. 787* 


The per- 
sonal 
taille 
in France 
on the 
profits of 
agricul- 
ture is 
arbitrary 
and un- 
certain. 


"Above, p. 370. 



The au- 
thority 
which as- 
sesses it is 
always 
ignorant 
of the real 
abilities 
of the 
contribu- 
tors and 
often mis- 
led by 
friend- 
ship, 
party 
animosity 
and pri- 
vate re- 
sentment. 


806 the wealth of nations 

case the taille was said to be personal. In the greater part of those 
provinces of France, which are called the Countries of Elections, 
the taille is of this kind. The real taille, as it is imposed only upon 
a part of the lands of the country, is necessarily an unequal, but it 
is not always an arbitrary tax, though it is so upon some occasions. 
The personal taille, as it is intended to be proportioned to the prof- 
its of a certain class of people, which can only be guessed at, is nec- 
essarily both arbitrary and unequal. 

In France the personal taille at present (1775) annually imposed 
upon the twenty generalities, called the Countries of Elections, 
amounts to 40,107,239 livres, 16 sous."^^ The proportion in which 
this sum is assessed upon those different provinces, varies from year 
to year, according to the reports which are made to the king’s 
council concerning the goodness or badness of the crops, as well as 
other circumstances, which may either increase or diminish their 
respective abilities to pay. Each generality is divided into a certain 
number of elections, and the proportion in which the sum im- 
posed upon the whole generality is divided among those different 
elections, varies likewise from year to year, according to the re- 
ports made to the council concerning their respective abilities. It 
seems impossible that the council, with the best intentions, can 
ever proportion with tolerable exactness, either of those two as- 
sessments to the real abilities of the province or district upon which 
they are respectively laid. Ignorance and misinformation must al- 
ways, more or less, mislead the most upright council. The propor- 
tion which each parish ought to support of what is assessed upon 
the whole election, and that which each individual ought to support 
of what is assessed upon his particular parish, are both in the same 
manner varied, from year to year, according as circumstances are 
supposed to require. These circumstances are judged of, in the one 
case, by the officers of the election; in the other by those of the par- 
ish; and both the one and the other are, more or less, under the 
direction and influence of the intendant. Not only ignorance and 
misinformation, but friendship, party animosity, and private re- 
sentment, are said frequently to mislead such assessors. No man 
subject to such a tax, it is evident, can ever be certain, before he is 
assessed, of what he is to pay. He cannot even be certain after he 
is assessed. If any person has been taxed who ought to have been 
exempted; or if any person has been taxed beyond his proportion, 
though both must pay in the mean time, yet if they complain, and 
make good their complaints, the whole parish is reimposed next 
year in order to reimburse them. If any of the contributors become 
^^Memoires concemant les Droits, &c. tome ii. p. 17. 



TAXES ON PARTICULAR PROFITS S07 

bankrupt or insolvent, the collector is obliged to advance his tax, 
and the whole parish is reimposed next year in order to reimburse 
the collector. If the collector himself should become bankrupt, the 
parish which elects him must answer for his conduct to the receiv- 
er-general of the election. But, as it might be troublesome for the 
receiver to prosecute the whole parish, he takes at his choice five or 
six of the richest contributors, and obliges them to make good what 
had been lost by the insolvency of the collector. The parish is aft- 
erwards reimposed in order to reimburse those five or six. Such re- 
impositions are always over and above the taille of the particular 
year in which they are laid on. 

When a tax is imposed upon the profits of stock in a particular 
branch of trade, the traders are all careful to bring no more goods 
to market than what they can sell at a price sufficient to reimburse 
them for advancing the tax. Some of them withdraw a part of their 
stocks from the trade, and the market is more sparingly supplied 
than before. The price of the goods rises, and the final payment of 
the tax falls upon the consumer. But when a tax is imposed upon 
the profits of stock employed in agriculture, it is not the interest of 
the farmers to withdraw any part of their stock from that employ- 
ment. Each farmer occupies a certain quantity of land, for which 
he pays rent. For the proper cultivation of this land a certain quan- 
tity of stock is necessary; and by withdrawing any part of this nec- 
essary quantity, the farmer is not likely to be more able to pay 
either the rent or the tax. In order to pay the tax, it can never be his 
interest to diminish the quantity of his produce, nor consequently 
to supply the market more sparingly than before. The tax, there- 
fore, will never enable him to raise the price of his produce, so as 
to reimburse himself by throwing the final pa3mient upon the 
consumer. The farmer, however, must have his reasonable profit 
as well as every other dealer, otherwise he must give up the trade. 
After the imposition of a tax of this kind, he can get this reason- 
able profit only by paying less rent to the landlord. The more he 
is obliged to pay in the way of tax, the less he can afford to pay in 
the way of rent. A tax of this kind imposed during the currency of 
a lease may, no doubt, distress or ruin the farmer. Upon the re- 
newal of the lease it must always fall upon the landlord. 

In the countries where the personal taille takes place, the farmer 
is commonly assessed in proportion to the stock which he appears 
to employ in cultivation. He is, upon this account, frequently afraid 
to have a good team of horses or oxen, but endeavours to cultivate 
with the meanest and most wretched instruments of husbandry that 


Taxes on 
the profits 
of agri- 
culture 
do not, 
like those 
on profits 
of other 
trades, 
fall on the 
consumer, 
but on the 
landlord. 


The dis- 
courage- 
ment to 
good cul- 
tivation 
caused by 


^Ed. I reads “nor to 



the per- 
sonal 
taille in- 
jures the 
public, 
the farm- 
er and the 
landlord. 


Ter capita 
taxes on 
negro 
slaves fall 
on the 
landlords. 


Poll taxes 
have been 
repre- 
sented as 
badges of 
slavery, 
but, to 
the tax- 
payer 
every tax 
is a badge 
of liberty. 


808 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

he can. Such is his distrust in the justice of his assessors, that he 
counterfeits poverty, and wishes to appear scarce able to pay any 
thing for fear of being obliged to pay too much. By this miserable 
policy he does not, perhaps, always consult his own interest in the 
most effectual manner; and he probably loses more by the diminu- 
tion of his produce than he saves by that of his tax. Though, in 
consequence of this wretched cultivation the market is, no doubt, 
somewhat worse supplied; yet the small rise of price which this 
may occasion, as it is not likely even to indemnify the farmer for 
the diminution of his produce, it is still less likely to enable him to 
pay more rent to the landlord. The public, the farmer, the land- 
lord, all suffer more or less by this degraded cultivation. That the 
personal taille tends, in many different ways, to discourage culti- 
vation, and consequently to dry up the principal source of the 
wealth of every good country, I have already had occasion to ob- 
serve in the third book of this Inquiry * 

What are called poll-taxes in the southern provinces of North 
America, and in the West Indian islands, annual taxes of so much 
a head upon every negroe, are properly taxes upon the profits of a 
certain species of stock employed in agriculture. As the planters 
are, the greater part of them, both farmers and landlords, the final 
payment of the tax falls upon them in their quality of landlords 
without any retribution. 

Taxes of so much a head upon the bondmen employed in culti- 
vation, seem anciently to have been common all over Europe. There 
subsists at present a tax of this kind in the empire of Russia. It is 
probably upon this account that poll-taxes of all kinds have often 
been represented as badges of slavery.*^® Every tax, however, is to 
the person who pays it a badge, not of slavery, but of liberty. It 
denotes that he is subject to government, indeed, but that, as he 
has some property, he cannot himself be the property of a master. 
A poll-tax upon slaves is altogether different from a poll-tax upon 
freemen. The latter is paid by the persons upon whom it is im- 
posed; the former by a different set of persons. The latter is either 
altogether arbitrary or altogether unequal, and in most cases is 
both the one and the other; tie former, though in some respects un- 
equal, different slaves being of different values, is in no respect 
arbitrary. Every master who knows the number of his own slaves, 
knows exactly what he has to pay. Those different taxes, however, 
being called by the same name, have been considered as of the 
same nature. 

Above, p. 370. ^ "®Ed. i reads “West India.” 

"E.g., by Montesquieu, Esprit des loisj liv., xiii., chap. xiv. 



TAXES ON CAPITAL VALUE ^09 

The taxes which in Holland are imposed upon men and maid 
servants, are taxes, not upon stock, but upon expence ; and so far 
resemble the taxes upon consumable commodities. The tax of a 
guinea a head for every man servant, which has lately been im- 
posed in Great Britain,^' is of the same kind. It falls heaviest upon 
the middling rank. A man of two hundred a year may keep a single 
man servant. A man of ten thousand a year will not keep fifty. It 
does not affect the poor.^® 

^ Taxes upon the profits of stock in particular employments can 
never affect the interest of money. Nobody will lend his money for 
less interest to those who exercise the taxed, than to those who 
exercise the untaxed emplo3mients. Taxes upon the revenue arising 
from stock in all employments, where the government attempts to 
levy them with any degree of exactness, will, in many cases, fall up- 
on the interest of money. The Vingtieme, or twentieth penny, in 
France, is a tax of the same kind with what is called the lanitax 
in England, and is assessed, in the same manner, upon the revenue 
arising from land, houses, and stock. So far as it affects stock it is 
assessed, though not with great rigour, yet with much more exact- 
ness than that part of the land-tax of England which is imposed 
upon the same fund. It, in many cases, falls altogether upon the in- 
terest of money. Money is frequently sunk in France upon what 
are called Contracts for the constitution of a rent; that is, perpet- 
ual annuities redeemable at any time by the debtor upon repay- 
ment of the sum originally advanced, but of which this redemption 
is not exigible by the creditor except in particular cases. The Ving- 
tieme seems not to have raised the rate of those annuities, though 
it is exactly levied upon them all. 


Appendix to Articles I and II 

Taxes upon the capital Value of Land, Houses, and Stock 

While property remains in the possession of the same person, 
whatever permanent taxes may have been imposed upon it, they 
have never been intended to diminish or take away any part of its 
capital value, but only some part of the revenue arising from it. 
But when property changes hands, when it is transmitted either 
from the dead to the living, or from the living to the living, such 
taxes have frequently been imposed upon it as necessarily take 
away some part of its capital value. 

^^17 Geo. Ill, c. 39 ^This paragraph is not in ed. i. 


Taxes on 
menial 
servants 
are like 
taxes on 
consum- 
able com- 
modities 


Taxes on 
particular 
profits 
cannot 
affect in- 
terest. 


Taxes on 
the trans- 
mission of 
property 
often ne- 
cessarily 
take a 
part of 
the capi- 
tal value. 



Transfers 
from the 
dead to 
the living 
and all 
transfers 
of im- 
movable 
property 
can be 
taxed di- 
rectly ; 
transfers 
by way of 
loan of 
money 
have been 
taxed by 
stamp 
duties or 
duties on 
registra- 
tion. 


Transfers 
from the 
dead to 
the living 
were 
taxed by 
the Vice- 
sima He- 
redita- 
tum, 

and the 
Dutch tax 
on suc- 
cessions. 


sio the wealth of nations 

The transference of all sorts of property from the dead to the 
living, and that of immoveable property, of lands and houses, from 
the living to the living, are transactions which are in their nature 
either public and notorious, or such as cannot be long concealed. 
Such transactions, therefore, may be taxed directly. The transfer- 
ence of stock or moveable property, from the living to the living, by 
the lending of money, is frequently a secret transaction, and may 
always be made so. It cannot easily, therefore, be taxed directly. It 
has been taxed indirectly in two different ways; first, by requiring 
that the deed, containing the obligation to repay, should be written 
upon paper or parchment which had paid a certain stamp-duty, 
otherwise not to be valid; secondly, by requiring, under the like 
penalty of invalidity, that it should be recorded either in a public or 
secret register, and by imposing certain duties upon such registra- 
tion. Stamp-duties and duties of registration have frequently been 
imposed likewise upon the deeds transferring property of all kinds 
from the dead to the living, and upon those transferring immove- 
able property from the living to the living, transactions which might 
easily have been taxed directly. 

The Vicesima Hereditatum, the twentieth penny of inheritances, 
imposed by Augustus upon the ancient Romans, was a tax upon the 
transference of property from the dead to the living. Dion Cassius,^® 
the author who writes concerning it the least indistinctly, says, 
that it was imposed upon all successions, legacies, and donations, in 
case of death, except upon those to the nearest relations, and to 
the poor. 

Of the same kind is the Dutch tax upon successions.'^'® Collateral 
successions are taxed, according to the degree of relation, from five 
to thirty per cent, upon the whole value of the succession. Testa- 
mentary donations, or legacies to collaterals, are subject to the like 
duties. Those from husband to wife, or from wife to husband, to 
the fifteenth penny. The Luctuosa Hereditas, the mournful suc- 
cession of ascendents to descendents, to the twentieth penny only. 
Direct successions, or those of descendents to ascendents, pay no 
tax. The death of a father, to such of his children as live in the same 
house with him, is seldom attended with any increase, and fre- 

^Lib. S 5 (25) quoted by Burman and Bouchaud. See also Burman de 
Vectigalibus Pop. Rom. cap. xi. in Utriusque thesauri antiquitatum roman- 
arum graecarumque nova supplementa congesta ab Joanne Poleno, Venice, 
1737, vol i., p. 1032B and Bouchaud de I’impdt du vingtieme sur les suc- 
cessions et de IHmpdt sur les marchandises chez les Romains; nouv. ed., 1772, 
pp. 10 sqq. 

®®See Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tome i. p. 225. 

®^A11 eds read “fiftieth,” but the Memoires say “quinzieme” and the 
“only” in the next sentence shows that Smith intended to write “fifteenth.” 



TAXES ON CAPITAL VALUE Sii 

quently with a considerable diminution of revenue; by the loss of 
his industry, or his office, or of some life-rent estate, of which he 
may have been in possession. That tax would be cruel and oppres- 
sive which aggravated their loss by taking from them any part of 
his succession. It may, however, sometimes be otherwise with those 
children who, in the language of the Roman law, are said to be 
emancipated; in that of the Scotch law, to be forisfamiliated; that 
is, who have received their portion, have got families of their own, 
and are supported by funds separate and independent of those of 
their father. Whatever part of his succession might come to such 
children, would be a real addition to their fortune, and might there- 
fore, perhaps, without more inconveniency than what attends aU 
duties of this kind, be liable to some tax. 

The casualties of the feudal law were taxes upon the transference 
of land, both from the dead to the living, and from the living to the 
living. In ancient times they constituted in every part of Europe 
one of the principal branches of the revenue of the crown. 

The heir of every immediate vassal of the crown paid a certain 
duty, generally a year’s rent, upon receiving the investiture of the 
estate. If the heir was a minor, the whole rents of the estate, dur- 
ing the continuance of the minority, devolved to the superior with- 
out any other charge, besides the maintenance of the minor, and the 
payment of the widow’s dower, when there happened to be a dowa- 
ger upon the land. When the minor came to be of age, another tax, 
called Relief, was still due to the superior, which generally amount- 
ed likewise to a year’s rent. A long minority, which in the present 
times so frequently disburdens a great estate of all its incumbrances, 
and restores the family to their ancient splendour, could in those 
times have no such effect. The waste, and not the disincumbrance 
of the estate, was the common effect of a long minority. 

By the feudal law the vassal could not alienate without the con- 
sent of his superior, who generally extorted a fine or composition 
for granting it. This fine, which was at first arbitrary, came in many 
countries to be regulated at a certain portion of the price of the 
land. In some countries, where the greater part of the other feudal 
customs have gone into disuse, this tax upon the alienation of land 
still continues to make a very considerable branch of the revenue 
of the sovereign. In the canton of Berne it is so high as a sixth part 
of the price of all noble fiefs; and a tenth part of that of all ignoble 
ones.®^ In the canton of Lucerne the tax upon the sale of lands is 
not universal, and takes place only in certain districts. But if any 

Ed. I does not contain “very.” 

“Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tome i. p. 154. 


The 
feudal 
law taxed 
the trans- 
ference of 
land, 

by ward- 
ships and 
reliefs, 


and fines 
on alien- 
ation, 
which last 
still form 
a consid- 
erable 
branch of 
revenue 
in many 
countries. 



8I2 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


These 
taxes on 
the sale 
of land 
may be 
levied by 
stamps or 
duties on 
registra- 
tion. 

In Great 
Britain 
the duties 
are not 
propor- 
tioned to 
the value 
of the 
property. 

In Hol- 
land some 
are pro- 
portioned 
and 
others 
not. 


person sells his land, in order to remove out of the territory, he pays 
ten per cent, upon the whole price of the sale.^*^ Taxes of the same 
kind upon the sale either of all lands, or of lands held by certain 
tenures, take place in many other countries, and make a more or 
less considerable branch of the revenue of the sovereign. 

Such transactions may be taxed indirectly, by means either of 
stamp-duties, or of duties upon registration; and those duties 
either may or may not be proportioned to the value of the subject 
which is transferred. 

In Great Britain the stamp-duties are higher or lower, not so 
much according to the value of the property transferred (an eight- 
een penny or half crown stamp being sufficient upon a bond for 
the largest sum of money) as according to the nature of the deed. 
The highest do not exceed six pounds upon every sheet of paper, 
or skin of parchment; and these high duties fall chiefly upon grants 
from the crown, and upon certain law proceedings, without any re- 
gard to the value of the subject. There are in Great Britain no 
duties on the registration of deeds or writings, except the fees of the 
officers who keep the register; and these are seldom more than a 
reasonable recompence for their labour. The crown derives no reve- 
nue from them. 

In Holland there are both stamp-duties and duties upon regis- 
tration; which in some cases are, and in some are not proportioned 
to the value of the property transferred. All testaments must be 
written upon stamped paper of which the price is proportioned to 
the property disposed of, so that there are stamps which cost from 
three pence, or three stivers a sheet, to three hundred florins, equal 
to about twenty-seven pounds ten shillings of our money. If the 
stamp is of an inferior price to what the testator ought to have 
made use of, his succession is confiscated. This is over and above 
all their other taxes on succession. Except bills of exchange, and 
some other mercantile bills, all other deeds, bonds, and contracts, 
are subject to a stamp-duty. This duty, however, does not rise in 
proportion to the value of the subject. All sales of land and of 
houses, and all mortgages upon either, must be registered, and, 
upon registration, pay a duty to the state of two and a half per 
cent, upon the amount of the price or of the mortgage.^® This duty 
is extended to the sale of all ships and vessels of more than two tons 
burthen, whether decked or undecked. These, it seems, are con- 
sidered as a sort of houses upon the water. The sale of moveables, 

“Id. p. 157. 

“Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tome i. p. 223, 224, 225. 

“ Ed. I reads “or the mortgage.” 



TAXES ON CAPITAL VALUE S13 

when it is ordered by a court of justice, is subject to the like duty 
of two and a half per cent. 

In France there are both stamp-duties and duties upon registra- 
tion. The former are considered as a branch of the aides or excise, 
and in the provinces where those duties take place, are levied by 
the excise officers. The latter are considered as a branch of the do- 
main of the crown, and are levied by a different set of officers. 

Those modes of taxation, by stamp-duties and by duties upon 
registration, are of very modern invention. In the course of little 
more than a centur}^, however, stamp-duties have, in Europe, be- 
come almost universal, and duties upon registration extremely com- 
mon. There is no art which one government sooner learns of an- 
other, than that of draining money from the pockets of the people. 

Taxes upon the transference of property from the dead to the 
living, fall finally as well as immediately upon the person to whom 
the property is transferred. Taxes upon the sale of land fall alto- 
gether upon the seller. The seller is almost always under the neces- 
sity of selling, and must, therefore, take such a price as he can get. 
The buyer is scarce ever under the necessity of buying, and will, 
therefore, only give such a price as he likes. He considers what 
the land will cost him in tax and price together. The more he is 
obliged to pay in the way of tax, the less he will be disposed to give 
in the way of price. Such taxes, therefore, fall almost always upon 
a necessitous person, and must, therefore, be frequently very cruel 
and oppressive. Taxes upon the sale of new-built houses, where the 
building is sold without the ground, fall generally upon the buyer, 
because the builder must generally have his profit; otherwise he 
must give up the trade. If he advances the tax, therefore, the buyer 
must generally repay it to him. Taxes upon the sale of old houses, 
for the same reason as those upon the sale of land, fall generally 
upon the seller; whom in most cases either conveniency or necessity 
obliges to sell. The number of new-built houses that are annually 
brought to market, is more less regulated by the demand. Unless 
the demand is such as to afford the builder his profit, after paying 
all expences, he will build no more houses. The number of old 
houses which happen at any time to come to market is regulated by 
accidents of which the greater part have no relation to the demand. 
Two or three great bankruptcies in a mercantile town, will bring 
many houses to sale, which must be sold for what can be got for 
them. Taxes upon the sale of ground rents fall altogether upon the 
seller; for the same reason as those upon the sale of land. Stamp- 
duties, and duties upon the registration of bonds and contracts for 
®^Ed. I reads ^‘give only.” 


In France 
different 
sets of 
officers 
collect the 
stamp 
duties and 
the regis- 
tration 
duties. 

Both 
stamps 
and regis- 
tration 
duties are 
modern 
methods 
of taxa- 
tion. 

Taxes on 
transfers 
from the 
dead to 
the living 
fall on the 
person 
who 
acquires 
the pro- 
perty; 
taxes on 
sales of 
land fall 
on the 
seller; 

taxes on 
the sale 
of new 
buildings 
fall on 
the 

buyer; 

taxes on 
the sale of 
old houses 
fall on 
the seller ; 

taxes on 
the sale of 
ground 



rents fall 
on the 
seller; 

taxes on 
loans 
fall on the 
borrow- 
er; 

taxes on 
law pro- 
ceedings 
fall on the 
suitors. 

All taxes 
on trans- 
fers, so 
far as 
they di- 
minish 
the capi- 
tal value, 
are un- 
thrifty. 

Even 

when pro- 
portioned 
to the 
value of 
the pro- 
perty 
they are 
unequal, 
because 
the fre- 
quency of 
transfer 
varies. 
They are 
certain, 
conveni- 
ent and 
inexpen- 
sive. 

French 
stamp- 
duties on 
transfers 
are not 
much 
com- 
plained 


S14 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

borrowed money, fall altogether upon the borrower, and, in fact, are 
always paid by him. Duties of the same kind upon law proceedings 
fall upon the suitors. They reduce to both the capital value of the 
subject in dispute. The more it costs to acquire any property, the 
less must be the neat value of it when acquired. 

All taxes upon the transference of property of every kind, so far 
as they diminish the capital value of that property, tend to dimin- 
ish the funds destined for the maintenance of productive labour. 
They are all more or less unthrifty taxes that increase the revenue 
of the sovereign, which seldom maintains any but unproductive 
labourers; at the expence of the capital of the people, which main- 
tains none but productive. 

Such taxes, even when they are proportioned to the value of the 
property transferred, are still unequal; the frequency of transfer- 
ence not being always equal in property of equal value. When they 
are not proportioned to this value, which is the case with the great- 
er part of the stamp-duties, and duties of registration, they are still 
more so. They are in no respect arbitrary, but are or may be in all 
cases perfectly clear and certain. Though they sometimes fall upon 
the person who is not very able to pay; the time of payment is in 
most cases sufficiently convenient for him. When the payment be- 
comes due, he must in most cases have the money to pay. They are 
levied at very little expence, and in general subject the contributors 
to no other inconveniency besides always the unavoidable one of 
paying the tax. 

In France the stamp-duties are not much complained of. Those 
of registration, which they call the Controle, are. They give occa- 
sion, it is pretended, to much extortion in the officers of the farmers- 
general who collect the tax, which is in a great measure arbitrary 
and uncertain. In the greater part of the libels which have been 
written against the present system of finances in France, the abuses 
of the Controle make a principal article. Uncertainty, however, does 
not seem to be necessarily inherent in the nature of such taxes. If 
the popular complaints are well founded, the abuse must arise, no* 
so much from the nature of the tax, as from the want of precision 
and distinctness in the words of the edicts or laws which impose it. 

The registration of mortgages, and in general of all rights upon 
immoveable property, as it gives great security both to creditors 
and purchasers, is extremely advantageous to the public. That of 
the greater part of deeds of other kinds is frequently inconvenient 

Ed. I does not contain “neat.” 

®*The word is used in its older sense, equivalent to the modern “pam- 
phlets.” See Murray Oxford English Dictionary, s.v. 



TAXES ON WAGES SiS 

and even dangerous to individuals, without any advantage to the 
public. All registers which, it is acknowledged, ought to be kept 
secret, ought certainly never to exist. The credit of individuals 
ought certainly never to depend upon so very slender a security as 
the probity and religion of the inferior officers of revenue. But 
where the fees of registration have been made a source of revenue 
to the sovereign, register offices have commonly been multiplied 
without end, both for the deeds which ought to be registered, and 
for those which ought not. In France there are several different 
sorts of secret registers. This abuse, though not perhaps a necessary, 
it must be acknowledged, is a very natural effect of such taxes. 

Such stamp-duties as those in England upon cards and dice, upon 
news-papers and periodical pamphlets, &c. are properly taxes upon 
consumption; the final payment falls upon the persons who use or 
consume such commodities. Such stamp-duties as those upon 
licences to retail ale, wine, and spirituous liquors, though intended, 
perhaps, to fall upon the profits of the retailers, are likewise finally 
paid by the consumers of those liquors. Such taxes, though called 
by the same name, and levied by the same officers and in the same 
manner with the stamp-duties above mentioned upon the trans- 
ference of property, are however of a quite different nature, and 
fall upon quite different funds. 


Article III 

Taxes upon the Wages oj Labour 

The wages of the inferior classes of workmen, I have endeavoured 
to show in the first book, are every where necessarily regulated by 
two different circumstances; the demand for labour, and the or- 
dinary or average price of provisions. The demand for labour, ac- 
cording as it happens to be either increasing, stationary, or declin- 
ing; or to require an increasing, stationary, or declining population, 
regulates the subsistence of the labourer, and determines in what 
degree it shall be, either liberal, moderate, or scanty. The ordinary 
or average price of provisions determines the quantity of money 
which must be paid to the workman in order to enable him, one 
year with another, to purchase this liberal, moderate, or scanty 
subsistence. While the demand for labour and the price of provi- 
sions, therefore, remain the same, a direct tax upon the wages of 
labour can have no other effect than to raise them somewhat high- 
er than the tax. Let us suppose, for example, that in a particular 


of, but 
the regis- 
tration 
duties (or 
Controle) 
are said to 
be arbi- 
trary and 
uncertain. 

Public 
registra- 
tion of 
mortgages 
and all 
rights to 
immov- 
able 

property 
is advan- 
tageous, 
but secret 
registers 
ought not 
to exist. 

Many 
stamp- 
duties are 
duties on 
consump- 
tion. 


A taxon 
wages 
must raise 
wages by 
rather 
more than 
the 

amount 
of the tax. 



the rise 
in the 
wages of 
manufac- 
turing 
labour 
would be 
advanced 
by the 
employers 
and paid 
by the 
consum- 
ers, and 
the rise 
in agricul- 
cultural 
wages ad- 
vanced by 
the farm- 
ers and 
paid by 
the land- 
lords. 


the wealth of nations 

place the demand for labour and the price of provisions were such, 
as to render ten shillings a week the ordinary wages of labour; and 
that a tax of one-fifth, or four shillings in the pound, was imposed 
upon wages. If the demand for labour and the price of provisions 
remained the same, it would still be necessary that the labourer 
should in that place earn such a subsistence as could be bought 
only for ten shillings a week, or that after paying the tax he should 
have ten shillings a week free wages. But in order to leave him such 
free wages after paying such a tax, the price of labour must in that 
place soon rise, not to twelve shillings a week only, but to twelve 
and sixpence; that is, in order to enable him to pay a tax of one- 
fifth, his wages must necessarily soon rise, not one-fifth part only, 
but one-fourth. Whatever was the proportion of the tax, the wages 
of labour must in all cases rise, not only in that proportion, but in a 
higher proportion. If the tax, for example, was one-tenth, the wages 
of labour must necessarily soon rise, not one-tenth part only, but 
one-eighth. 

A direct tax upon the wages of labour, therefore, though the la- 
bourer might perhaps pay it out of his hand, could not properly be 
said to be even advanced by him; at least if the demand for labour 
and the average price of provisions remained the same after the tax 
as before it. In all such cases, not only the tax, but something more 
than the tax, would in reality be advanced by the person who im- 
mediately employed him. The final payment would in different 
cases fall upon different persons. The rise which such a tax might 
occasion in the wages of manufacturing labour would be advanced 
by the master manufacturer, who would both be entitled and 
obliged to charge it, with a profit, upon the price of his goods. The 
final payment of this rise of wages, therefore, together with the 
additional profit of the master manufacturer, would fall upon the 
consumer. The rise which such a tax might occasion in the wages of 
country labour would be advanced by the farmer, who, in order to 
maintain the same number of labourers as before, would be obliged 
to employ a greater capital. In order to get back this greater cap- 
ital, together with the ordinary profits of stock, it would be neces- 
sary that he should retain a larger portion, or what comes to the 
same thing, the price of a larger portion, of the produce of the land, 
and consequently that he should pay less rent to the landlord. The 
final payment of this rise of wages, therefore, would in this case 
fall upon the landlord, together with the additional profit of the 
farmer who had advanced it. In all cases a direct tax upon the wages 
of labour must, in the long-run, occasion both a greater reduction 
in the rent of land, and a greater rise in the price of manufactured 



TAXES ON WAGES S17 

goods, than would have followed from the proper assessment of a 
sum equal to the produce of the tax, partly upon the rent of land, 
and partly upon consumable commodities. 

If direct taxes upon the wages of labour have not always occa- 
sioned a proportionable rise in those wages, it is because they have 
generally occasioned a considerable fall in the demand for labour. 
The declension of industry, the decrease of employment for the 
poor, the diminution of the annual produce of the land and labour 
of the country, have generally been the effects of such taxes. In con- 
sequence of them, however, the price of labour must always be high- 
er than it otherwise would have been in the actual state of the de- 
mand: and this enhancement of price, together with the profit of 
those who advance it, must always be finally paid by the landlords 
and consumers. 

A tax upon the wages of country labour does not raise the price 
of the rude produce of land in proportion to the tax; for the 
same reason that a tax upon the farmer’s profit does not raise that 
price in that proportion.^^ 

Absurd and destructive as such taxes are, however, they take 
place in many countries. In France that part of the taille which is 
charged upon the industry of workmen and day-labourers in coun- 
try villages, is properly a tax of this kind. Their wages are com- 
puted according to the common rate of the district in which they 
reside, and that they may be as little liable as possible to any over- 
charge, their yearly gains are estimated at no more than two hun- 
dred working days in the year.®^ The tax of each individual is 
varied from year to year according to different circumstances, of 
which the collector or the commissary, whom the intendant ap- 
points to assist him, are the judges. In Bohemia, in consequence of 
the alteration in the system of finances which was begun in 1748, a 
very heavy tax is imposed upon the industry of artificers. They are 
divided into four classes. The highest class pay a hundred florins a 
year; which, at two-and-twenty-pence halfpenny a florin, amounts 
to 9/. 7^. 6J. The second class are taxed at seventy; the third at 
fifty; and the fourth, comprehending artificers in villages, and the 
lowest class of those in towns, at twenty-five florins.®® 

The recompence of ingenious artists and of men of liberal profes- 
sions, I have endeavoured to show in the first book,®^ necessarily 
keeps a certain proportion to the emoluments of inferior trades. A 

Ed. I does not contain “in proportion to the tax.” 

®^Ed. I does not contain “in that proportion ” 

Memoires concernant les Droits, &c. tom ii. p. 108. 

®®Id. tom. iii. really i. p. 87. Above, pp. loo-iio. 


The effect 
of the tax 
in raising 
wages is 
generally 
disguised 
by the fall 
in the de- 
mand for 
labour 
which it 
occasions. 


A tax on 
agricul- 
tural 
wages 
raises 
prices no 
more than 
one on 
farmers’ 
profits. 

Many 
countries 
have such 
taxes, e.g., 
France 
and Bo- 
hemia. 


A tax on 
the re- 
compense 
of the 



8i8 


liberal 
profes- 
sions, etc., 
would 
also raise 
that re- 
compense, 
but a tax 
on gov- 
ernment 
offices 
would not 
raise sal- 
aries. 


These are 
capitation 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

tax upon this recompence, therefore, could have no other effect than 
to raise it somewhat higher than in proportion to the tax. If it did 
not rise in this manner, the ingenious arts and the liberal profes- 
sions, being no longer upon a level with other trades, would be so 
much deserted that they would soon return to that level. 

The emoluments of officers are not, like those of trades and pro- 
fessions, regulated by the free competition of the market, and do 
not, therefore, always bear a just proportion to what the nature of 
the employment requires. They are, perhaps, in most countries, 
higher than it requires; the persons who have the administration of 
government being generally disposed to reward both themselves 
and their immediate dependents rather more than enough. The 
emoluments of officers, therefore, can in most cases very well bear 
to be taxed. The persons, besides, who enjoy public offices, espe- 
cially the more lucrative, are in all countries the objects of general 
envy; and a tax upon their emoluments, even though it should be 
somewhat higher than upon any other sort of revenue, is always a 
very popular tax. In England, for example, when by the land-tax 
every other sort of revenue was supposed to be assessed at four 
shillings in the pound, it was very popular to lay a real tax of 
five shillings and sixpence in the pound upon the sdaries of offices 
which exceeded a hundred pounds a year; the pensions of the 
younger branches of the royaJ family, the pay of the officers of the 
army and navy, and a few others less obnoxious to envy excepted.®® 
There are in England no other direct taxes upon the wages of 
labour. 


Article IV 


Taxes which, it is intended, should jail indifferently upon every 
different Species of Revenue 


The taxes which, it is intended, should fall indifferently upon every 
different species of revenue, are capitation taxes, and taxes upon 

^“Was supposed to be” is equivalent to “was nominally but not really.” 

Eds. I and 2 read “a real tax of five shillings in the pound upon the 
salaries of offices which exceeded a hundred pounds a year; those of the 
judges and a few others less obnoxious to envy excepted.” Under 31 Geo. IL, 
c. 22, a tax of IS. in the pound was imposed on all offices worth more than 
£100 a year, naval and military offices excepted. The judges were not ex- 
cepted, but their salaries were raised soon afterwards. See Dowell, History 
of Taxation and Taxes, vol. ii., pp. 135-136. The 6d. seems a mistake: the 
5^ IS arrived at by adding the 4s. land tax (which was “real” in the case of 
offices) and the is. 



CAPITATION TAXES S19 

consumable commodities. These must be paid indifferently from 
whatever revenue the contributors may possess; from the rent of 
their land, from the profits of their stock, or from the wages of 
their labour. 


Capitation Taxes 

Capitation taxes, if it is attempted to proportion them to the for- 
tune or revenue of each contributor, become altogether arbitrary. 
The state of a man’s fortune varies from day to day, and without 
an inquisition more intolerable than any tax, and renewed at least 
once every year, can only be guessed at. His assessment, therefore, 
must m most cases depend upon the good or bad humour of his 
assessors, and must, therefore, be altogether arbitrary and uncer- 
tain. 

Capitation taxes, if they are proportioned not to the supposed 
fortune, but to the rank of each contributor, become altogether un- 
equal; the degree of fortune being frequently unequal in the same 
degree of rank. 

Such taxes, therefore, if it is attempted to render them equal, be- 
come altogether arbitrary and uncertain; and if it is attempted to 
render them certain and not arbitrary, become altogether unequal. 
Let the tax be light or heavy, uncertainty is always a great griev- 
ance. In a light tax a considerable degree of inequ^ity may be sup- 
ported; in a heavy one it is altogether intolerable. 

In the different poll-taxes which took place in England during 
the reign of William III.®'^ the contributors were, the greater part 
of them, assessed according to the degree of their rank; as dukes, 
marquisses, earls, viscounts, barons, esquires, gentlemen, the eldest 
and youngest sons of peers, &c. All shopkeepers and tradesmen 
worth more than three hundred pounds, that is, the better sort of 
them, were subject to the same assessment; how great soever might 
be the different in their fortunes.®^ Their rank was more consid- 
ered than their fortune. Several of those who in the first poll-tax 
were rated according to their supposed fortune, were afterwards 
rated according to their rank. Serjeants, attornies, and proctors at 
law, who in the first poll-tax were assessed at three shillings in the 
pound of their supposed income, were afterwards assessed as gen- 
tlemen.®® In the assessment of a tax which was not very heavy, a 

®^The first of these is under i W. and M., sess. i, c. 13. 

I W. and M., sess. 2, c. 7, § 2, 

Under i W. and M., c. 13, § 4, serjeants, attorneys and proctors, as well 
as certain other classes, were to pay 3s. in the pound on their receipts. Under 
I W. and M., sess. 2, c. 7, § 2, attorneys and proctors and others were to 


taxes and 
taxes on 
consum- 
able com- 
modities. 


Capita- 
tion taxes 
ostensibly 
propor- 
tioned to 
revenue 
are alto- 
gether 
arbitrary. 


If propor- 
tioned to 
rank they 
are un- 
equal. 

In the 
first case 
they are 
always 
grievous 
and in the 
second 
they are 
intoler- 
able un- 
less they 
are light. 

In the 
poll taxes 
of Wil- 
liam III. 
assess- 
ment was 
chiefly 
according 
to rank. 



In France 
the assess- 
ment is 
by rank 
in the 
higher 
and by 
supposed 
fortune in 
the lower 
orders of 
people. 


The 

French 

tax is 

more 

rigorously 

exacted 

than the 

English 

taxes 

were. 


820 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

considerable degree of inequality had been found less insupport- 
able than any degree of uncertainty. 

In the capitation which has been levied in France without any 
interruption since the beginning of the present century, the high- 
est orders of people are rated according to their rank, by an invari- 
able tariff; the lower orders of people, according to what is sup- 
posed to be their fortune, by an assessment which varies from year 
to year. The officers of the king’s court, the judges and other offi- 
cers in the superior courts of justice, the officers of the troops, &c. 
are assessed in the first manner. The inferior ranks of people in the 
provinces are assessed in the second. In France the great easily sub- 
mit to a considerable degree of inequality in a tax which, so far as 
it affects them, is not a very heavy one; but could not brook the 
arbitrary assessment of an intendant. The inferior ranks of people 
must, in that country, suffer patiently the usage which their su- 
periors think proper to give them. 

In England the different poll-taxes never produced the sum which 
had been expected from them, or which, it was supposed, they 
might have produced, had they been exactly levied. In France the 
capitation always produces the sum expected from it. The mild 
government of England, when it assessed the different ranks of 
people to the poll-tax, contented itself with what that assessment 
happened to produce; and required no compensation for the loss 
which the state might sustain either by those who could not pay, or 
by those who would not pay (for there were many such), and who, 
by the indulgent execution of the law, were not forced to pay. The 
more severe government of France assesses upon each generality a 
certain sum, which the intendant must find as he can. If any 
province complains of being assessed too high, it may, in the assess- 
ment of next year, obtain an abatement proportioned to the over- 
charge of the year before. But it must pay in the mean time. The 
intendant, in order to be sure of finding the sum assessed upon his 
generality, was impowered to assess it in a larger sum, that die fail- 
ure or inability of some of the contributors might be compensated 
by the over-charge of the rest; and till 1765, the fixation of this 
surplus assessment was left altogether to his discretion. In that year 


f 

pay 20s. in addition to the sums already charged. Under 2 W. and M., sess. 
I, c. 2, § 5, serjeants-at-law were to pay £15, apparently in addition to the 
3s. in the pound. Under 3 W. and M., c. 6, the poundage charge does not 
appear at all. The alterations were doubtless made in order to secure cer- 
tainty, but purely in the interest of the government, which desired to be 
certain of getting a fixed amount. Under the Land Tax Act of 8 and 9 W. 
III., c. 6, § 5, Serjeants, attorneys, proctors, etc., are again charged to an 
income tax. 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES S21 

indeed the council assumed this power to itself. In the capitation 
of the provinces, it is observed by the perfectly well-informed au- 
thor of the Memoirs upon the impositions in France, the propor- 
tion which falls upon the nobility, and upon those whose priv- 
ileges exempt them from the taille, is the least considerable. The 
largest falls upon those subject to the taille, who are assessed to 
the capitation at so much a pound of what they pay to that other 
tax.*^^ 

Capitation taxes, so far as they are levied upon the lower ranks 
of people, are direct taxes upon the wages of labour, and are at- 
tended with all the inconveniencies of such taxes. 

Capitation taxes are levied at little expence; and, where they are 
rigorously exacted, afford a very sure revenue to the state. It is 
upon this account that in countries where the ease, comfort, and 
security of the inferior ranks of people are little attended to, capi- 
tation taxes are very common. It is in general, however, but a small 
part of the public revenue, which, in a great empire, has ever been 
drawn from such taxes; and the greatest sum which they have ever 
afforded, might always have been found in some other way much 
more convenient to, the people. 


Taxes upon consumable Commodities 

The impossibility of taxing the people, in proportion to their 
revenue, by any capitation, seems to have given occasion to the 
invention of taxes upon consumable commodities. The state not 
knowing how to tax, directly and proportionably, the revenue of 
its subjects, endeavours to tax it indirectly by taxing their expence, 
which, it is supposed, will in most cases be nearly in proportion to 
their revenue. Their expence is taxed by taxing the consumable 
commodities upon which it is laid out. 

Consumable commodities are either necessaries or luxuries. 

By necessaries I understand, not only the commodities which 
are indispensably necessary for the support of life, but whatever 
the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people, 
even of the lowest order, to be without. A linen shirt, for example, 
is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life. The Greeks and Romans 
lived, I suppose, very comfortably, though they had no linen.^^ But 

'^®Ed. I reads “portion” '^Memoires, tom. ii., p. 421. 

Dr, John Arbuthnot, in his Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights and Meas- 
ures, 2nd ed., 1754, p. 142, says that linen was not used among the Romans, 
at least by men, till about the time of Alexander Severus. 


Capita- 
tion taxes 
on the 
lower 
orders of 
people are 
like taxes 
on wages. 

They are 
inexpen- 
sive and 
afford a 
sure re- 
venue. 


The im- 
possibility 
of taxa- 
tion ac- 
cording to 
revenue 
has given 
rise to 
taxation 
according 
to ex- 
penditure 
on con- 
sumable 
commodi- 
ties, 
either 
neces- 
saries or 
luxuries, 



neces- 
saries in- 
cluding 
all that 
credit- 
able 

people of 
the lowest 
order 
cannot 
decently 
go with- 
out. 


What 
raises the 
price of 
subsist- 
ence must 
raise 
wages. 


So that a 
taxon 
neces- 
saries, 
like a tax 
on wages, 
raises 
wages. 


S22 the wealth of nations 

in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a credit- 
able day-labourer would be ashamed to appear in public without a 
linen shirt, the want of which would be supposed to denote that 
disgraceful degree of poverty, which, it is presumed, no body can 
well fall into without extreme bad conduct. Custom, in the same 
manner, has rendered leather shoes a necessary of life in England. 
The poorest creditable person of either sex would be ashamed to 
appear in public without them. In Scotland, custom has rendered 
them a necessary of life to the lowest order of men; but not to the 
same order of women, who may, without any discredit, walk about 
bare-footed. In France, they are necessaries neither to men nor to 
women; the lowest rank of both sexes appearing there publicly, 
without any discredit, sometimes in wooden shoes, and sometimes 
bare-footed. Under necessaries therefore, I comprehend, not only 
those things which nature, but those things which the established 
rules of decency have rendered necessary to the lowest rank of 
people. All other things I call luxuries; without meaning by this 
appellation, to throw the smallest degree of reproach upon the tem- 
perate use of them. Beer and ale, for example, in Great Britain, 
and wine, even in the wine countries, I call luxuries."^® A man of any 
rank may, without any reproach, abstain totally from tasting such 
liquors. Nature does not render them necessary for the support of 
life; and custom nowhere renders it indecent to live without them. 

As the wages of labour are every where regulated, partly by the 
demand for it, and partly by the average price of the necessary 
articles of subsistence; whatever raises this average price must 
necessarily raise those wages, so that the labourer may still be able 
to purchase that quantity of those necessary articles which the state 
of the demand for labour, whether increasing, stationary, or de- 
clining, requires that he should have.*^^ A tax upon those articles 
necessarily raises their price somewhat higher than the amount of 
the tax, because the dealer who advances the tax, must generally 
get it back with a profit. Such a tax must, therefore, occasion a rise 
in the wages of labour proportionable to this rise of price. 

It is thus that a tax upon the necessaries of life, operates exactly 
in the same manner as a direct tax upon the wages of labour. The 
labourer, though he may pay it out of his hand, cannot, for any 
considerable time at least, be properly said even to advance it. It 
must always in the long-run be advanced to him by his immediate 
employer in the advanced rate of his wages. His employer, if he is a 

”In Lectures, p 179, above in ed. i. p 432 note, beer seems to be re- 
garded as a necessary of life rather than a luxury 
See Book I , Chap. 8 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES S23 

manufacturer, will charge upon the price of his goods this rise of 
wages, together with a profit; so that the final payment of the tax, 
together with this over-charge, will fail upon the consumer. If his 
employer is a farmer, the final pa5mient, together with a like over- 
charge, will fall upon the rent of the landlord. 

It is otherwise with taxes upon which I call luxuries; even upon 
those of the poor. The rise in the price of the taxed commodities, 
will not necessarily occasion any rise in the wages of labour. A tax 
upon tobacco, for example, though a luxury of the poor as well as 
of the rich, will not raise wages. Though it is taxed in England at 
three times, and in France at fifteen times its original price, those 
high duties seem to have no effect upon the wages of labour. The 
same thing may be said of the taxes upon tea and sugar; which in 
England and Holland have become luxuries of the lowest ranks of 
people; and of those upon chocolate, which in Spain is said to have 
become so. The different taxes which in Great Britain have in the 
course of the present century been imposed upon spirituous liquors, 
are not supposed to have had any effect upon the wages of labour. 
The rise in the price of porter, occasioned by an additional tax of 
three shillings upon the barrel of strong beer,"^^ has not raised the 
wages of common labour in London. These were about eighteen 
pence and twenty-pence a day before the tax, and they are not 
more now. 

The high price of such commodities does not necessarily dimin- 
ish the ability of the inferior ranks of people to bring up families. 
Upon the sober and industrious poor, taxes upon such commodities 
act as sumptuary laws, and dispose them either to moderate, or to 
refrain altogether from the use of superfluities which they can no 
longer easily afford. Their ability to bring up families, in conse- 
quence of this forced frugality, instead of being diminished, is fre- 
quently, perhaps, increased by the tax. It is the sober and indus- 
trious poor who generally bring up the most numerous families, 
and who principally supply the demand for useful labour. All the 
poor indeed are not sober and industrious, and the dissolute and 
disorderly might continue to indulge themselves in the use of such 
commodities after this rise of price in the same manner as before; 
without regarding the distress which this indulgence might bring 
upon their families. Such disorderly persons, however, seldom rear 
up numerous families; their children generally perishing from 
neglect, mismanagement, and the scantiness or unwholesomeness of 
their food. If by the strength of their constitution they survive the 
hardships to which the bad conduct of their parents exposes them; 

Geo III c 7 


Taxes on 
luxuries 
even if 
consumed 
by the 
poor have 
no such 
effect, 


as they 
act like 
sumptu- 
ary laws, 
and so do 
not dimi- 
nish the 
ability of 
the poor 
to bring 
up useful 
families, 



whereas a 
rise in the 
price of 
neces- 
saries di- 
minishes 
the ability 
of the 
poor to 
bring up 
useful 
families 
and sup- 
ply the 
demand 
for 

labour. 

Taxes on 
neces- 
saries are 
contrary 
to the in- 
terest of 
the 

middle 
and supe- 
rior ranks 
af people. 


^24 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

yet the example of that bad conduct commonly corrupts their 
morals; so that, instead of being useful to society by their industry, 
they become public nuisances by their vices and disorders. Though 
the advanced price of the luxuries of the poor, therefore, might in- 
crease somewhat the distress of such disorderly families, and 
thereby diminish somewhat their ability to bring up children; it 
would not probably diminish much the useful population of the 
country. 

Any rise in the average price of necessaries, unless it is compen- 
sated by a proportionable rise in the wages of labour, must neces- 
sarily diminish more or less the ability of the poor to bring up 
numerous families, and consequently to supply the demand for 
useful labour; whatever may be the state of that demand, whether 
increasing, stationary, or declining; or such as requires an increas- 
ing, stationary, or declining population. 

Taxes upon luxuries have no tendency to raise the price of any 
other commodities except that of the commodities taxed. Taxes 
upon necessaries, by raising the wages of labour, necessarily tend to 
raise the price of all manufactures, and consequently to diminish 
the extent of their sale and consumption. Taxes upon luxuries are 
finally paid by the consumers of the commodities taxed, without 
any retribution. They fall indifferently upon every species of reve- 
nue, the wages of labour, the profits of stock, and the rent of land. 
Taxes upon necessaries, so far as they affect the labouring poor, 
are finally paid, partly by landlords in the diminished rent of their 
lands, and partly by rich consumers, whether landlords or others, in 
the advanced price of manufactured goods; and always with a con- 
siderable over-charge. The advanced price of such manufactures as 
are real necessaries of life, and are destined for the consumption of 
the poor, of coarse woollens, for example, must be compensated to 
the poor by a farther advancement of their wages. The middling and 
superior ranks of people, if they understood their own interest, 
ought always to oppose all taxes upon the necessaries of life, as 
well as all direct taxes upon the wages of labour. The final payment 
of both the one and the other falls altogether upon themselves, and 
always with a considerable over-charge. They fall heaviest upon 
the landlords, who always pay in a double capacity; in that of land- 
lords, by the reduction of their rent; and in that of rich consumers, 
by the increase of their expence. The observation of Sir Matthew 
Decker, that certain taxes are, in the price of certain goods, some- 
times repeated and accumulated four or five times, is perfectly just 
with regard to taxes upon the necessaries of life. In the price of 
leather, for example, you must pay, not only for the tax upon the 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES 

leather of your own shoes, but for a part of that upon those of the 
shoe-maker and the tanner. You must pay too for the tax upon the 
salt, upon the soap, and upon the candles which those workmen 
consume while employed in your service, and for the tax upon the 
leather, which the salt-maker, the soap-maker, and the candle- 
maker consume while employed in their serviced® 

In Great Britain, the principal taxes upon the necessaries of life 
are those upon the four commodities just now mentioned, salt, taxeUn 
leather, soap, and candles. neces- 

Salt is a very ancient and a very universal subject of taxation. It 
was taxed among the Romans, and it is so at present in, I believe, 
every part of Europe. The quantity annually consumed by any in- leather, 
dividual is so small, and may be purchased so gradually, that no- 
body, it seems to have been thought, could feel very sensibly even ’ 

a pretty heavy tax upon it. It is in England taxed at three shillings 
and fourpence a bushel; about three times the original price of the 
commodity. In some other countries the tax is still higher. Leather 
is a real necessary of life. The use of linen renders soap such. In 
countries where the winter nights are long, candles are a necessary 
instrument of trade. Leather and soap are in Great Britain taxed at 
three halfpence a pound; candles at a penny; taxes which, upon 
the original price of leather, may amount to about eight or ten per 
cent.; upon that of soap to about twenty or five and twenty per 
cent.; and upon that of candles to about fourteen or fifteen per 
cent.; taxes which, though lighter than that upon salt, are still 
very heavy. As all those four commodities are real necessaries of 
life, such heavy taxes upon them must increase somewhat the ex- 
pence of the sober and industrious poor, and must consequently 
raise more or less the wages of their labour. 

In a country where the winters are so cold as in Great Britain, and, also 
fuel is, during that season, in the strictest sense of the word, a 
necessary of life, not only for the purpose of dressing victuals, but 
for the comfortable subsistence of many different sorts of workmen 
who work within doors; and coals are the cheapest of all fuel. The 
price of fuel has so important an influence upon that of labour, that 
all over Great Britain manufactures have confined themselves prin- 
cipally to the coal countries; other parts of the country, on account 
of the high price of this necessary article, not being able to work so 
cheap. In some manufactures, besides, coal is a necessary instru- 

Leather is Decker’s example, Essay on the Decline of the Foreign Trade, 

2nd ed., 1750, pp. 29, 30. See also p. 10. 

”See Dowell, History of Taxation and Taxes, 1884, vol. iv, pp. 318, 322, 

330 - 



826 


Such 
taxes at 
any rate 
bring in 
revenue, 
which is 
more than 
can be 
said of 
the regu- 
lations of 
the corn 
trade, 
etc., 
which 
produce 
equally 
bad 
effects. 


Much 
higher 
taxes on 
neces- 
saries pre- 
vail in 
many 
other 
countries. 
There are 
taxes on 
bread, 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

ment of trade; as in those of glass, iron, and all other metals. If a 
bounty could in any case be reasonable, it might perhaps be so upon 
the transportation of coals from those parts of the country in which 
they abound, to those in which they are wanted. But the legislature, 
instead of a bounty, has imposed a tax of three shillings and three- 
pence a ton upon coal carried coastways; which upon most sorts 
of coal is more than sixty per cent, of the original price at the coal- 
pit. Coals carried either by land or by inland navigation pay no 
duty. Where they are naturally cheap, they are consumed duty 
free: where they are naturally dear, they are loaded with a heavy 
duty. 

Such taxes, though they raise the price of subsistence, and con- 
sequently the wages of labour, yet they afford a considerable reve- 
nue to government, which it might not be easy to find in any other 
way. There may, therefore, be good reasons for continuing them. 
The bounty upon the exportation of corn, so far as it tends in the 
actual state of tillage to raise the price of that necessary article, 
produces all the like bad effects; and instead of affording any reve- 
nue, frequently occasions a very great expence to government. The 
high duties upon the importation of foreign corn, which in years of 
moderate plenty amount to a prohibition; and the absolute prohi- 
bition of the importation either of live cattle or of salt provisions, 
which takes place in the ordinary state of the law, and which, on 
account of the scarcity, is at present suspended for a limited time 
with regard to Ireland and the British plantations,"^^ have all the 
bad effects of taxes upon the necessaries of life, and produce no 
revenue to government. Nothing seems necessary for the repeal of 
such regulations, but to convince the public of the futility of that 
system in consequence of which they have been established. 

Taxes upon the necessaries of life are much higher in many other 
countries than in Great Britain. Duties upon flour and meal when 
ground at the mill, and upon bread when baked at the oven, take 
place in many countries. In Holland the money price of the bread 
consumed in towns is supposed to be doubled by means of such 
taxes. In lieu of a part of them, the people who live in the country 
pay every year so much a head, according to the sort of bread they 
are supposed to consume. Those who consume wheaten bread, pay 
three guilders fifteen stivers; about six shillings and ninepence half- 
penny, These, and some other taxes of the same kind, by raising 
the price of labour, are said to have ruined the greater part of the 

™Saxby, British Customs, p. 307. 8 Ann., c. 4; 9 Ann., c, 6. 

™ Above, vol. i, p. 392. 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^^7 

manufactures of Holland.®^^ Similar taxes, though, not quite so 
heavy, take place in the Milanese, in the states of Genoa, in the 
dutchy of Modena, in the dutchies of Parma, Placentia, and Guas- 
talla, and in the ecclesiastical state. A French author of some 
note has proposed to reform the finances of his country, by sub- 
stituting in the room of the greater part of other taxes, this most 
ruinous of all taxes. There is nothing so absurd, says Cicero, which 
has not sometimes been asserted by some philosophers.^^ 

Taxes upon butchers meat are still more common than those 
upon bread. It may indeed be doubted whether butchers meat is 
any where a necessary of life. Grain and other vegetables, with the 
help of milk, cheese, and butter, or oil, where butter is not to be 
had, it is known from experience, can, without any butchers meat, 
afford the most plentiful, the most wholesome, the most nourish- 
ing, and the most invigorating diet. Decency no where requires that 
any man should eat butchers meat, as it in most places requires 
that he should wear a linen shirt or a pair of leather shoes. 

Consumable commodities, whether necessaries or luxuries, may 
be taxed in two different ways. The consumer may either pay an 
annual sum on account of his using or consuming goods of a certain 
kind; or the goods may be taxed while they remain in the hands of 
the dealer, and before they are delivered to the consumer. The con- 
sumable goods which last a considerable time before they are con- 
sumed altogether, are most properly taxed in the one way. Those of 
which the consumption is either immediate or more speedy, in the 
other. The coach-tax and plate-tax are examples of the former 
method of imposing: the greater part of the other duties of excise 
and customs, of the latter. 

A coach may, with good management, last ten or twelve years. It 
might be taxed, once for all, before it comes out of the hands of 
the coach-maker. But it is certainly more convenient for the buyer 
to pay f gur pounds a year for the privilege of keeping a coach, than 
to pay all at once forty or forty-eight pounds additional price to the 
coach-maker; or a sum equivalent to what the tax is likely to cost 
him during the time he uses the same coach. A service of plate, in 

^Memoires concemant les Droits, &c. p. 210, 211 and 233. See below, p. 

857. 

Reformateur. Amsterdam, 1756. Garmer m his note on this passage, 
Recherchesy etc., tom. iv., p. 387, attributes this work to Clicquot de Bler- 
vache, French Inspector-general of Manufactures and Commerce, 1766-90, 
but later authorities doubt or deny Clicquot’s authorship. See Jules de Vroil, 
itude sur Clicquot-Blervache, 1870, pp. xxxi-xxxiii. 

Divinationey ii., $8, *‘Sed nescio quomodo nihil tarn absurde did 
potest quod non dicatur ab aliquo philosophorum.” 


and meat. 


A tax on a 
consum- 
able com- 
modity 
maybe 
levied 
either 
periodi- 
cally from 
the con- 
sumer or 
once for 
all from 
the dealer 
when the 
consumer 
acquires 
it. 

The first 
method is 
best 

when the 
com- 



modity is 
durable. 


SirM. 
Decker 
proposed 
to adapt 
it also to 
other 
commodi- 
ties by 
issuing 
annual 
licences to 
consume 
them, but 
this 

would be 
liable to 
greater 
objections 
than the 
second 
and usual 
method. 


S28 the wealth of nations 

the same manner, may last more than a century. It is certainly 
easier for the consumer to pay five shillings a year for every hun- 
dred ounces of plate, near one per cent, of the value, than to re- 
deem this long annuity at five and twenty or thirty years purchase, 
which would enhance the price at least five and twenty or thirty 
per cent. The different taxes which affect houses are certainly more ' 
conveniently paid by moderate annual payments, than by a heavy 
tax of equal value upon the first building or sale of the house. 

It was the well-known proposal of Sir Matthew Decker, that all 
commodities, even those of which the consumption is either im- 
mediate or very speedy, should be taxed in this manner; the dealer 
advancing nothing, but the consumer paying a certain annual sum 
for the licence to consume certain goods.®^ The object of his scheme 
was to promote all the different branches of foreign trade, particu- 
larly the carrying trade, by taking away all duties upon importa- 
tion and exportation, and thereby enabling th^ merchant to employ 
his whole capital and credit in the purchase of goods and the 
freight of ships, no part of either being diverted towards the ad- 
vancing of taxes. The project, however, of taxing, in this manner, 
goods of immediate or speedy consumption, seems liable to the four 
following very important objections. First, the tax would be more 
unequal, or not so well proportioned to the expence and consump- 
tion of the different contributors, as in the way in which it is com- 
monly imposed. The taxes upon ale, wine, and spirituous liquors, 
which are advanced by the dealers, are finally paid by the different 
consumers exactly in proportion to their respective consumption. 
But if the tax were to be paid by purchasing a licence to drink 
those liquors, the sober would, in proportion to his consumption, 
be taxed much more heavily than the drunken consumer. A family 
which exercised great hospitality would be taxed much more light- 
ly than one who entertained fewer guests. Secondly, this mode 
of taxation, by paying for an annual, half-yearly, or quarterly 
licence to consume certain goods, would diminish very much one 
of the principal conveniences of taxes upon goods of speedy con- 
sumption; the piece-meal payment. In the price of three-pence half- 
penny, which is at present paid for a pot of porter, the different 
taxes upon malt, hops, and beer, together with the extraordinary 
profit which the brewer charges for having advanced them, may 
perhaps amount to about three halfpence. If a workman can con- 
veniently spare those three halfpence, he buys a pot of porter. If 

Essay on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, 2nd ed., 1750, 

pp. 78-163. 

Eds. 1-3 read “wa^.” 


Eds. I and 2 read “which.’ 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES S29 

he cannot, he contents himself with a pint, and, as a penny saved is 
a penny got, he thus gains a farthing by his temperance. He pays 
the tax piece-meal, as he can afford to pay it, and when he can 
afford to pay it; and every act of payment is perfectly voluntary, 
and what he can avoid if he chuses to do so. Thirdly, such taxes 
would operate less as sumptuary laws. When the licence was once 
purchased, whether the purchaser drunk much or drunk little, his 
tax would be the same. Fourthly, if a workman were to pay all at 
once, by yearly, half-yearly or quarterly pa5mients, a tax equal to 
what he at present pays, with little or no inconveniency, upon all 
the different pots and pints of porter which he drinks in any such 
period of time, the sum might frequently distress him very much. 
This mode of taxation, therefore, it seems evident, could never, 
without the most grievous oppression, produce a revenue nearly 
equal to what is derived from the present mode without any op- 
pression. In several countries, however, commodities of an im- 
mediate or very speedy consumption are taxed in this manner. In 
Holland, people pay so much a head for a licence to drink tea. I 
have already mentioned a tax upon bread, which, so far as it is con- 
sumed in farm-houses and country villages, is there levied in the 
same manner. 

The duties of excise are imposed chiefly upon goods of home pro- 
duce destined for home consumption. They are imposed only upon 
a few sorts of goods of the most general use. There can never be any 
doubt either concerning the goods which are subject to those duties, 
or concerning the particular duty which each species of goods is 
subject to. They fall almost altogether upon what I call luxuries, 
excepting always the four duties above mentioned, upon salt, soap, 
leather, candles, and, perhaps, that upon green glass. 

The duties of customs are much more ancient than those of ex- 
cise. They seem to have been called customs, as denoting customary 
payments which had been in use from time immemorial. They ap- 
pear to have been originally considered as taxes upon the profits of 
merchants. During the barbarous times of feudal anarchy, mer- 
chants, like all the other inhabitants of burghs, were considered as 
little better than emancipated bondmen, whose persons were de- 
spised, and whose gains were envied. The great nobility, who had 
consented that the king should tallage the profits of their own ten- 
ants, were not unwilling that he should tallage likewise those of an 
order of men whom it was much less their interest to protect. In 
those ignorant times, it was not understood, that the profits of mer- 
chants are a subject not taxable directly; or that the final payment 

®®Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 


Except- 
ing the 
four men 
tioned 
above, 
British 
excise 
duties 
fall 

chiefly or* 
luxuries. 

Customs 
were ori- 
ginally 
regarded 
as taxes 
on mer- 
chants’ 
profits^ 



those of 
aliens be- 
ing taxed 
more 
heavily. 


So origin- 
ally cus- 
toms were 
imposed 
equally 
on all 
sorts of 
goods, 
and on 
exports 
as well as 
imports. 

The first 
was that 
on wool 
and 
leather, 
and the 
second 
tonnage 
(on wine) 
and 

poundage 
(on all 
other 
goods). 
Subsidies 
were ad- 
ditions to 
poundage. 


S30 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

of all such taxes must fall, with a considerable over-charge, upon 

the consumers. 

The gains of alien merchants were looked upon more unfavour- 
ably than those of English merchants. It was natural, therefore, 
that those of the former should be taxed more heavily than those 
of the latter.®^ This distinction between the duties upon aliens and 
those upon English merchants, which was begun from ignorance, 
has been continued from the spirit of monopoly, or in order to give 
our own merchants an advantage both in the home and in the for- 
eign market. 

With this distinction, the ancient duties of customs were imposed 
equally upon all sorts of goods, necessaries as well as luxuries, 
goods exported as well as goods imported. Why should the dealers 
in one sort of goods, it seems to have been thought, be more fa- 
voured than those in another? or why should the merchant exporter 
be more favoured than the merchant importer? 

The ancient customs were divided into three branches. The first, 
and perhaps the most ancient of all those duties, was that upon 
wool and leather. It seems to have been chiefly or altogether an ex- 
portation duty. When the woollen manufacture came to be estab- 
lished in England, lest the king should lose any part of his customs 
upon wool by the exportation of woollen cloths, a like duty was 
imposed upon them. The other two branches were, first, a duty 
upon wine, which, being imposed at so much a ton, was called a 
tonnage; and, secondly, a duty upon all other goods, which, being 
imposed at so much a pound of their supposed value, was called a 
poundage. In the forty-seventh year of Edward III. a duty of six- 
pence in the pound was imposed upon all goods exported and im- 
ported, except wools, wool-fells, leather, and wines, which were 
subject to particular duties. In the fourteenth of Richard II. this 
duty was raised to one shilling in the pound; but three years after- 
wards, it was again reduced to sixpence. It was raised to eight- 
pence in the second year of Henry IV.; and in the fourth year of 
the same prince, to one shilling. From this time to the ninth year of 
William III. this duty continued at one shilling in the pound. The 
duties of tonnage and poundage were generally granted to the king 
by one and the same act cf parliament, and were called the Subsidy 
of Tonnage and Poundage. The subsidy of poundage having con- 
tinued for so long a time at one shilling in the pound, or at five per 
cent.; a subsidy came, in the language of the customs, to denote a 
general duty of this kind of five per cent. This subsidy, which is 
now called the Old Subsidy, still continues to be levied according 

Above, pp. 431, 461. 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^ 3 ^ 

to the book of rates established in the twelfth of Charles IL The 
method of ascertaining, by a book of rates, the value of goods sub- 
ject to this duty, is said to be older than the time of James The 
new subsidy imposed by the ninth and tenth of William IIL,®^ was 
an additional five per cent, upon the greater part of goods. The 
one-third and the two-third subsidy made up between them an- 
other five per cent, of which they were proportionable parts. The 
subsidy of 1747 made a fourth five per cent, upon the greater 
part of goods ; and that of 1 7 59,"^- a fifth upon som.e particular sorts 
of goods. Besides those five subsidies, a great variety of other du- 
ties have occasionally been imposed upon particular sorts of goods, 
in order sometimes to relieve the exigencies of the state, and some- 
times to regulate the trade of the country, according to the prin- 
ciples of the mercantile system. 

That system has come gradually more and more into fashion. 
The old subsidy was imposed indifferently upon exportation as well 
as importation. The four subsequent subsidies, as well as the other 
duties which have since been occasionally imposed upon particular 
sorts of goods, have, with a few exceptions, been laid altogether 
upon importation. The greater part of the ancient duties which had 
been imposed upon the exportation of the goods of home produce 
and manufacture, have either been lightened or taken away alto- 
gether. In most cases they have been taken away. Bounties have 
even been given upon the exportation of some of them. Drawbacks 
too, sometimes of the whole, and, in most cases, of a part of the 
duties which are paid upon the importation of foreign goods, have 
been granted upon their exportation. Only half the duties imposed 
by the old subsidy upon importation are drawn back upon exporta- 
tion: but the whole of those imposed by the latter subsidies and 
other imposts are, upon the greater part of goods, drawn back in 
the same manner.®^ This growing favour of exportation, and dis- 
couragement of importation, have suffered only a few exceptions, 
which chiefly concern the materials of some manufactures. These, 
our merchants and manufacturers are willing should come as cheap 

^Gilbert, Treatise on the Court of Exchequer^ 1758, p. 224, mentions a 
Book of Rates printed in 1586 Dowell, History of Taxation and Taxes, 1884, 
vol 1, pp 146, 165, places the begmning of the system soon after 1558. 

C. 23. 2 and 3 Ann. c. 9; 3 and 4 Ann., c 5 

21 Geo II , c. 2. 

®^32 Geo. IL, c. 10, on tobacco, linen, sugar and other grocery, except 
currants, East India goods (except coffee and raw silk), brandy and other 
spirits (except colonial rum), and paper. 

®*Ed. I reads, more intelligibly, “later.” Another example of this unfortu- 
nate change occurs below, p. 884. 

Above, pp. 466, 467, written after the present passage. 


The pre- 
valence of 
the prin- 
ciples of 
the mer- 
cantile 
system 
has led 
to the re- 
moval of 
nearly all 
the ex- 
port 
duties, 



and has 
been un- 
favour- 
able to 
the re- 
venue of 
the state, 

annihil- 
ating 
parts of it 
by pro- 
hibitions 
of im- 
portation, 


and re- 
ducing 
other 
parts by 
high 
duties. 


S32 the wealth of nations 

as possible to themselves, and as dear as possible to their rivals and 
competitors in other countries. Foreign materials are, upon this 
account, sometimes allowed to be imported duty free ; Spanish wool, 
for example, flax, and raw linen yarn. The exportation of the ma- 
terials of home produce, and of those which are the particular 
produce of our colonies, has sometimes been prohibited, and some- 
times subjected to higher duties. The exportation of English wool 
has been prohibited.^® That of beaver skins, of beaver wool, and 
of gum Senega, has been subjected to higher duties; Great 
Britain, by the conquest of Canada and Senegal, having got almost 
the monopoly of those commodities. 

That the mercantile system has not been very favourable to the 
revenue of the great body of the people, to the annual produce of 
the land and labour of the country, I have endeavoured to shew in 
the fourth book of this Inquiry. It seems not to have been more 
favourable to the revenue of the sovereign; so far at least as that 
revenue depends upon the duties of customs. 

In consequence of that system, the importation of several sorts 
of goods has been prohibited altogether. This prohibition has in 
some cases entirely prevented, and in others has very much dimin- 
ished the importation of those commodities, by reducing the im- 
porters to the necessity of smuggling. It has entirely prevented the 
importation of foreign woollens; and it has very much diminished 
that of foreign silks and velvets. In both cases it has entirely anni- 
hilated the revenue of customs which might have been levied upon 
such importation. 

The high duties which have been imposed upon the importation 
of many different sorts of foreign goods, in order to discourage 
their consumption in Great Britain, have in many cases served only 
to encourage smuggling; and in all cases have reduced the revenue 
of the customs below what more moderate duties would have af- 
forded. The saying of Dr. Swift, that in the arithmetic of the cus- 
toms two and two, instead of making four, make sometimes only 
one,®® holds perfectly true with regard to such heavy duties, which 

®®Eds. 1-3 read “peculiar,” and “particular” is perhaps a misprint. 

Above, pp. 612-616. Above, pp. 622, 623 

Swift attributes the saying to an unnamed commissioner of customs. “I 
will tell you a secret, which I learned many years ago from the commis- 
sioners of the customs in London, they said when any commodity appeared 
to be taxed above a moderate rate, the consequence was to lessen that branch 
of the revenue by one-half; and one of these gentlemen pleasantly told me 
that the mistake of parliaments on such occasions was owing to an error of 
computing two and two make four; whereas in the business of laying im- 
positions, two and two never made more than one; which happens by 
lessening the import, and the strong temptation of running such goods as 
paid high duties, at least in this kingdom.”— “Answer to a Paper Called a 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^33 

never could have been imposed, had not the mercantile system 
taught us, in many cases, to employ taxation as an instrument, not 
of revenue, but of monopoly. 

The bounties which are sometimes given upon the exportation of 
home produce and manufactures, and the drawbacks which are paid 
upon the re-exportation of the greater part of foreign goods, have 
given occasion to many frauds, and to a species of smuggling more 
destructive of the public revenue than any other. In order to obtain 
the bounty or drawback, the goods, it is well known, are sometimes 
shipped and sent to sea; but soon afterwards clandestinely reland- 
ed in some other part of the country. The defalcation of the reve- 
nue of customs occasioned by bounties and drawbacks, of which a 
great part are obtained fraudulently, is very great. The gross pro- 
duce of the customs in the year which ended on the 5th of January 
1755, amounted to 5,068,000/. The bounties which were paid out 
of this revenue, though in that year there was no bounty upon corn, 
amounted to 167,800/. The drawbacks which were paid upon de- 
bentures and certificates, to 2,156,800/. Bounties and drawbacks to- 
gether, amounted to 2,324,600/. In consequence of these deduc- 
tions the revenue of the customs amounted only to 2,743,400/.: 
from which, deducting 287,900/. for the expence of management in 
salaries and other incidents, the neat revenue of the customs for 
that year comes out to be 2,455,500/, The expence of management 
amounts in this manner to between five and six per cent, upon the 
gross revenue of the customs, and to something more than ten per 
cent, upon what remains of that revenue, after deducting what is 
paid away in bounties and drawbacks. 

Heavy duties being imposed upon almost all goods imported, 
our merchant importers smuggle as much, and make entry of as 
little as they can. Our merchant exporters, on the contrary, mahe 
entry of more than they export; sometimes out of vanity, and to 
pass for great dealers in goods which pay no duty; and sometimes 
to gain a bounty or a drawback. Our exports, in consequence of 
these different frauds, appear upon the customhouse books greatly 
to overbalance our imports; to the unspeakable comfort of those 
politicians who measure the national prosperity by what they call 
the balance of trade. 

All goods imported, unless particularly exempted, and such ex- 
emptions are not very numerous, are liable to some duties of cus- 

Memorial of the Poor Inhabitants, Tradesmen and Labourers of the King- 
dom of Ireland” (in Works, ed. Scott, 2nd ed., 1883, vol. vii., pp. 165-166. The 
saying is quoted from Swift by Hume in his Essay on the Balance of Trade, 
and by Lord Karnes in his Sketches of the History of Man, 1774, vol. i., p. 
474 )- 


Bounties 
and 
dravv- 
backs 
(great 
part of 
which is 
obtained 
by fraud) 
and ex- 
penses of 
manage- 
ment 
make a 
large 

deduction 
from the 
customs 
revenue. 


In the 
customs 
returns 
the im- 
ports are 
minimised 
and the 
exports 
exagger- 
ated. 


The cus- 
toms are 



^34 the wealth of NATIONS 

very nu- toms. If any goods are imported not mentioned in the book of rates, 
Sd much twenty shillings value, ac- 

less per- cording to the oath of the importer, that is, nearly at five subsidies, 
spicuous or five poundage duties. The book of rates is extremely compre- 
tbct^an ii^iisive, and enumerates a great variety of articles, many of them 
the excise little used, and therefore not well known. It is upon this account 
duties. frequently uncertain under what article a particular sort of goods 
ought to be classed, and consequently what duty they ought to pay. 
Mistakes with regard to this sometimes ruin the customhouse offi- 
cer, and frequently occasion much trouble, expence, and vexation 
to the importer. In point of perspicuity, precision, and distinctness, 
therefore, the duties of customs are much inferior to those of excise. 
They In order that the greater part of the members of any society 

^ight should contribute to the public revenue in proportion to their re- 
great ad- spective expence, it does not seem necessary that every single arti- 

vantage cle of that expence should be taxed. The revenue, which is levied 

fined^o a duties of excise, is supposed to fall as equally upon the con- 

few ar- tributors as that which is levied by the duties of customs; and the 

tides. duties of excise are imposed upon a few articles only of the most 

general use and consumption. It has been the opinion of many 
people, that, by proper management, the duties of customs might 
likewise, without any loss to the public revenue, and with great 
advantage to foreign trade, be confined to a few articles only. 
Foreign The foreign articles, of the most general use and consumption in 
Great Britain, seem at present to consist chiefly in foreign wines 
and East and brandies ; in some of the productions of America and the West 
^d West , Indies, sugar, rum, tobacco, cocoanuts, &c. and in some of those of 
products Indies, tea, coffee, china-ware, spiceries of all kinds, sev- 

at present eral sorts of piece-goods, &c. These different articles afford, per- 
haps, at present, the greater part of the revenue which is drawn 
customs duties of customs. The taxes which at present subsist upon 

revenue. foreign manufactures, if you except those upon the few contained 
in the foregoing enumeration, have the greater part of them been 
imposed for the purpose, not of revenue, but of monopoly, or to 
give our own merchants an advantage in the home market. By re- 
moving all prohibitions, and by subjecting all foreign manufactures 
to such moderate taxes, as it was found from experience afforded 
upon each article the greatest revenue to the public, our own work- 
men might still have a considerable advantage in the home market, 
and many articles, some of which at present afford no revenue to 
government, and others a very inconsiderable one, might afford a 
very great one. 


Saxby, British Customs^ p. 266. 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^35 

High taxes, sometimes by diminishing the consumption of the 
taxed commodities, and sometimes by encouraging smuggling, fre- 
quently afford a smaller revenue to government than what might be 
drawn from more moderate taxes. 

When the diminution of revenue is the effect of the diminution 
of consumption, there can be but one remedy, and that is the lower- 
ing of the tax. 

When the diminution of the revenue is the effect of the encour- 
agement given to smuggling, it may perhaps be remedied in two 
ways; either by diminishing the temptation to smuggle, or by in- 
creasing the difficulty of smuggling. The temptation to smuggle can 
be diminished only by the lowering of the tax, and the difficulty of 
smuggling can be increased only by establishing that system of ad- 
ministration which is most proper for preventing it. 

The excise laws, it appears, I believe, from experience, obstruct 
and embarrass the operations of the smuggler much more effectual- 
ly than those of the customs. By introducing into the customs a 
system of administration as similar to that of the excise as the na- 
ture of the different duties will admit, the difficulty of smuggling 
might be very much increased. This alteration, it has been sup- 
posed by many people, might very easily be brought about. 

The importer of commodities liable to any duties of customs, it 
has been said, might at his option be allowed either to carry them 
to his own private warehouse, or to lodge them in a warehouse pro- 
vided either at his own expence or at that of the public, but under 
the key of the customhouse officer, and never to be opened but in 
his presence. If the merchant carried them to his own private ware- 
house, the duties to be immediately paid, and never afterwards to 
be drawn back; and that warehouse to be at all times subject to the 
visit and examination of the customhouse officer, in order to ascer- 
tain how far the quantity contained in it corresponded with that 
for which the duty had been paid. If he carried them to the public 
warehouse, no duty to be paid till they were taken out for home 
consumption. If taken out for exportation, to be duty-free; proper 
security being always given that they should be so exported. The 
dealers in those particular commodities, either by wholesale or re- 
tail, to be at all times subject to the visit and examination of the 
customhouse officer; and to be obliged to justify by proper certifi- 
cates the pa)mient of the duty upon the whole quantity contained 
in their shops or warehouses. What are called the excise-duties upon 
rum imported are at present levied in this manner, and the same 
system of administration might perhaps be extended to all duties 
upon goods imported; provided always that those duties were, like 


The yield 
of high 
duties IS 
often les- 
sened b> 
smuggling 
or di- 
minished 
consump- 
tion 

In the 
first case 
the only 
remed}- i 
to lower 
the duty, 

For 

smugglini 
the re- 
medy is 
to lowei 
the tax 01 
increase 
the diffi- 
culty of 
smug- 
gling 

Excise 
laws are 
more em- 
barrassing 
to the 
smuggler 
than the 
customs 

If cus- 
toms were 
confined 
to a few 
articles, a 
system of 
excise 
super- 
vision of 
stores 
could be 
insti- 
tuted 



Great 
simplifi- 
cation 
without 
loss of 
revenue 
would 
then be 
secured, 


while the 
trade and 
manufac- 
tures of 
the coun- 
try would 
gain 
greatly. 


the wealth of nations 

the duties of excise, confined to a few sorts of goods of the most 
general use and consumption. If they were extended to almost all 
sorts of goods, as at present, public warehouses of sufficient extent 
could not easily be provided, and goods of very delicate nature, or 
of which the preservation required much care and attention, could 
not safely be trusted by the merchant in any warehouse but his own. 

If by such a system of administration smuggling, to any consid- 
erable extent, could be prevented even under pretty high duties; 
and if every duty was occasionally either heightened or lowered 
according as it was most likely, either the one way or the other, to 
afford the greatest revenue to the state; taxation being always em- 
ployed as an instrument of revenue and never of monopoly; it 
seems not improbable that a revenue, at least equal to the present 
neat revenue of the customs, might be drawn from duties upon the 
importation of only a few sorts of goods of the most general use and 
consumption; and that the duties of customs might thus be brought 
to the same degree of simplicity, certainty, and precision, as those 
of excise. What the revenue at present loses, by drawbacks upon 
the re-exportation of foreign goods which are afterwards relanded 
and consumed at home, would under this system be saved alto- 
gether. If to this saving, which would alone be very considerable, 
were added the abolition of all bounties upon the exportation 
of home-produce; in all cases in which those bounties were not in 
reality drawbacks of some duties of excise which had before been 
advanced; it cannot well be doubted but that the neat revenue of 
customs might, after an alteration of this kind, be fully equal to 
what it had ever been before. 

If by such a change of system the public revenue suffered no loss, 
the trade and manufactures of the country would certainly gain a 
very considerable advantage. The trade in the commodities not 
taxed, by far the greatest number, would be perfectly free, and 
might be carried on to and from all parts of the world with every 
possible advantage. Among those commodities would be compre- 
hended all the necessaries of life, and all the materials of manufac- 
ture. So far as the free importation of the necessaries of life reduced 
their average money price in the home market, it would reduce the 
money price of labour, but without reducing in any respect its real 
recompence. The value of money is in proportion to the quantity of 
the necessaries of life which it will purchase. That of the necessaries 
of life is altogether independent of the quantity of money which 
can be had for them. The reduction in the money price of labour 
would necessarily be attended with a proportionable one in that of 
^®®Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^37 

all home-manufactureSj which would thereby gain some advantage 
in all foreign markets. The price of some manufactures would be 
reduced in a still greater proportion by the free importation of the 
raw materials. If raw silk could be imported from China and In- 
dostan duty-free, the silk manufacturers in England could greatly 
undersell those of both France and Italy. There would be no occa- 
sion to prohibit the importation of foreign silks and velvets. The 
cheapness of their goods would secure to our own workmen, not 
only the possession of the home, but a very great command of the 
foreign market. Even the trade in the commodities taxed would be 
carried on with much more advantage than at present. If those 
commodities were delivered out of the public warehouse for foreign 
exportation, being in this case exempted from all taxes, the trade in 
them would be perfectly free. The carrying trade in all sorts of 
goods would under this system enjoy every possible advantage. If 
those commodities were delivered out for home-consumption, the 
importer not being obliged to advance the tax till he had an oppor- 
tunity of selling his goods, either to some dealer, or to some con- 
sumer, he could always afford to sell them cheaper than if he had 
been obliged to advance it at the moment of importation. Under 
the same taxes, the foreign trade of consumption even in the taxed 
commodities, might in this manner be carried on with much more 
advantage than it can at present. 

It was the object of the famous excise scheme of Sir Robert Wal- Sir 
pole to establish, with regard to wine and tobacco, a system not 
very unlike that which is here proposed. But though the bill which pole's 
was then brought into parliament, comprehended those two com- excise 
modities only; it was generally supposed to be meant as an intro- 
duction to a more extensive scheme of the same kind. Faction, com- something 
bined with the interest of smuggling merchants, raised so violent, ^kis 
though so unjust, a clamour against that bill, that the minister 
thought proper to drop it; and from a dread of exciting a clamour wme and 
of the same kind, none of his successors have dared to resume the tobacco 

project. cerned. 

The duties upon foreign luxuries imported for home-consump- 
tion, though they sometimes fall upon the poor, fall principally duties on 
upon people of middling or more than middling fortune. Such are, forei^ 
for example, the duties upon foreign wines, upon coffee, chocolate, 
tea, sugar, &c. chiefly on 

The duties upon the cheaper luxuries of home-produce destined the 
for home-consumption, fall pretty equally upon people of all ranks 
in proportion to their respective expence. The poor pay the duties ranks, 
upon malt, hops, beer, and ale, upon their own consumption: The 



Those on 
the 

luxuries 
of home 
produce 
fall on 
people of 
all ranks. 

Taxes on 
the con- 
sumption 
of the in- 
ferior 
ranks are 
much 
more pro- 
ductive 
than 
those on 
the con- 
sumption 
of the 
rich. 


S38 the wealth of nations 

rich, upon both their own consumption and that of their servants. 

The whole consumption of the inferior ranks of people, or of 
those below the middling rank, it must be observed, is in every 
country much greater, not only in quantity, but in value, than that 
of the middling and of those above the middling rank. The whole 
expence of the inferior is much greater than that of the superior 
ranks. In the first place, almost the whole capital of every country is 
annually distributed among the inferior ranks of people, as the 
wages of productive labour. Secondly, a great part of the revenue 
arising from both the rent of land and the profits of stock, is 
annually distributed among the same rank, in the wages and main- 
tenance of menial servants, and other unproductive labourers. 
Thirdly, some part of the profits of stock belongs to the same rank, 
as a revenue arising from the employment of their small capitals. 
The amount of the profits annually made by small shopkeepers, 
tradesmen, and retailers of all kinds, is every where very consider- 
able, and makes a very considerable portion of the annual produce. 
Fourthly, and lastly, some part even of the rent of land belongs to 
the same rank; a considerable part to those who are somewhat be- 
low the middling rank, and a small part even to the lowest rank; 
common labourers sometimes possessing in property an acre or two 
of land. Though the expence of those inferior ranks of people, 
therefore, taking them individually, is very small, yet the whole 
mass of it, taking them collectively, amounts always to by much 
the largest portion of the whole expence of the society; what re- 
mains, of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country 
for the consumption of the superior ranks, being always much less, 
not only in quantity but in value. The taxes upon expence, there- 
fore, which fall chiefly upon that of the superior ranks of people, 
upon the smaller portion of the annual produce, are likely to be 
much less productive than either those which fall indifferently upon 
the expence of all ranks, or even those which fall chiefly upon ^at 
of the inferior ranks ; than either those which fall indifferently upon 
the whole annual produce, or those which fall chiefly upon the 
larger portion of it. The excise upon the materials and manufacture 
of home-made fermented and spirituous liquors is accordingly, of 
all the different taxes upon expence, by far the most productive; 
and this branch of the excise falls very much, perhaps principally, 
upon the expence of the common people. In the year which ended 
on the 5th of July 1775, the gross produce of this branch of the 
excise amounted to 3,341,837^. 95. 

I reads “both upon.” ^“Ed. i reads “both from.” 

^“Ed, I reads “and from.” “*Ed. i reads “£3,314,223 i8s. io|d.” 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^39 

It must always be remembered, however, that it is the luxurious But such 
and not the necessary expence of the inferior ranks of people that 
ought ever to be taxed. The final payment of any tax upon their never be 
necessary expence would fall altogether upon the superior ranks of 
people; upon the smaller portion of the annual produce, and not co^sm^. 
upon the greater. Such a tax must in all cases either raise the wages tion of 
of labour, or lessen the demand for it. It could not raise the wages 
of labour, without throwing the final payment of the tax upon the ranks, 
superior ranks of people. It could not lessen the demand for labour, 
without lessening the annual produce of the land and labour of the 
country, the fund from which all taxes must be finally paid. What- 
ever might be the state to which a tax of this kind reduced the de- 
mand for labour, it must always raise wages higher than they other- 
wise would be in that state; and the final payment of this enhance- 
ment of wages must in all cases fall upon the superior ranks of 
people. 

Fermented liquors brewed, and spirituous liquors distilled, not Liquors 
for sale, but for private use, are not in Great Britain liable to any 
duties of excise. This exemption, of which the object is to save pri- for pri- 
vate families from the odious visit and examination of the tax- vateuse 

gatherer, occasions the burden of those duties to fall frequently eSmpt 
much lighter upon the rich than upon the poor. It is not, indeed, from 
very common to distil for private use, though it is done sometimes. 

But in the country, many middling and almost all rich and great composi- 
families brew their own beer. Their strong beer, therefore, costs tion must 
them eight shillings a barrel less than it costs the common brewer, 
who must have his profit upon the tax, as well as upon all the ing. 
other expence which he advances. Such families, therefore, must 
drink their beer at least nine or ten shillings a barrel cheaper than 
any liquor of the same quality can be drunk by the common peo- 
ple, to whom it is every where more convenient to buy their beer, 
by little and little, from the brewery or the alehouse. Malt, in the 
same manner, that is made for the use of a private family, is not 
liable to the visit or examination of the tax-gatherer; but in this 
case the family must compound at seven shillings and sixpence a 
head for the tax. Seven shillings and sixpence are equal to the excise 
upon ten bushels of malt; a quantity fully equal to what all the 
different members of any sober family, men, women, and children, 
are at an average likely to consume. But in rich and great families, 
where country hospitality is much practised, the malt liquors con- 
sumed by the members of the family make but a small part of the 
consumption of the house. Either on account of this composition, 

Ed. I reads “is not to expose private famOies to.” 



It is said 
that a tax 
on malt 
smaller 
than the 
present 
taxes on 
malt, beer 
and ale 
taken to- 
gether 
would 
bring in 
more 
revenue, 

and 

figures are 
quoted to 
prove it. 


Taxes on 
cyder and 
mum in- 
cluded in 
the old 
malt tax 
are 

counter- 
balanced 
by the 
‘country 
excise’ 
duty on 


840 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

however, or for other reasons, it is not near so common to malt as 
to brew for private use. It is difficult to imagine any equitable rea- 
son why those who either brew or distil for private use, should not 
be subject to a composition of the same kind. 

A greater revenue than what is at present drawn from all the 
heavy taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, might be raised, it has fre- 
quently been said, by a much lighter tax upon malt; the opportuni- 
ties of defrauding the revenue being much greater in a brewery than 
in a malt-house; and those who brew for private use being exempt- 
ed from all duties or composition for duties, which is not the case 
with those who malt for private use. 

In the porter brewery of London, a quarter of malt is commonly 
brewed into more than two barrels and a half, sometimes into three 
barrels of porter. The different taxes upon malt amount to six 
shillings a quarter; those upon strong beer and ale to eight shillings 
a barrel. In the porter brewery, therefore, the different taxes upon 
malt, beer, and ale, amount to between twenty-six and thirty shil- 
lings upon the produce of a quarter of malt. In the country brewery 
for common country sale, a quarter of malt is seldom brewed into 
less than two barrels of strong and one barrel of small beer; fre- 
quently into two barrels and a half of strong beer. The different 
taxes upon small beer amount to one shilling and four-pence a bar- 
rel. In the country brewery, therefore, the different taxes upon 
malt, beer, and ale, seldom amount to less than twenty-three shil- 
lings and four-pence, frequently to twenty-six shillings, upon the 
produce of a quarter of malt. Taking the whole kingdom at an 
average, therefore, the whole amount of the duties upon malt, beer, 
and ale, cannot be estimated at less than twenty-four or twenty-five 
shillings upon the produce of a quarter of malt. But by taking off 
all the different duties upon beer and ale, and by tripling the malt- 
tax, or by raising it from six to eighteen shillings upon the quarter 
of malt, a greater revenue, it is said, might be raised by this single 
tax than what is at present drawn from all those heavier taxes. 

Under the old malt tax, indeed, is comprehended a tax of four 
shillings upon the hogshead of cyder, and another of ten shillings 
upon the barrel of mum. In 1774, the tax upon cyder produced only 
3083/. 6 s Sd. It probably fell somewhat short of its usual amount; 
all tie different taxes upon cyder having, that year, produced less 
than ordinary. The tax upon mum, though much heavier, is still less 
productive, on account of the smaller consumption of that liquor. 
But'to balance whatever may be the ordinary amount of those two 
taxes; there is comprehended under what is called The country 
excise, first, the old excise of six shillings and eight-pence upon the 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES 841 


1 . s. d. 

In 1772, the old malt-tax produced 722,023 ii ri 

The additional 356,776 7 pf 

In 1773, the old tax produced 561,627 3 71 

The additional 278,650 15 3! 

In 1774, the old tax produced 624,614 17 5I 

The additional 310,745 2 8J 

In 1775, the old tax produced 657,357 — SJ 

The additional 323,785 12 6i 

4 )3335^580 12 —i 

Average of these four years 958,895 3 — jV 

In 1772, the country excise produced 1,243,128 5 3 

The London brewery 408,260 7 2f 

In 1773, the country excise 1,245,808 3 3 

The London brewery 405,406 17 lof 

In 1774, the country excise 1,246,373 14 5I 

The London brewery 320,601 iS — -J 

In 1775, the country excise 1,214,583 6 i 

The London brewery 463,670 7 — | 

4 )6,547,832 19 H 

Average of these four years 1,636,958 4 9§ 

To which adding the average malt tax, or 958,895 3 — 

The whole amount of these different taxes comes out 

to be 2,595,853 7 9i| 

But by tripling the malt tax, or by raising it from six tol 
eighteen shillings upon the quarter of malt, that singlet 2,876,685 9 —-3^ 

tax would produce J 

A sum which exceeds the foregoing by 280,832 i 2JI 


hogshead of cyder; secondly, a like tax of six shillings and eight- 
pence upon the hogshead of verjuice; thirdly, another of eight 
shillings and nine-pence upon the hogshead of vinegar; and, lastly, 
a fourth tax of eleven-pence upon the gallon of mead or metheglin: 
the produce of those different taxes will probably much more than 
counterbalance that of the duties imposed, by what is called The 
annual malt tax upon cyder and mum. 

Malt is consumed not only in the brewery of beer and ale, but in 
the manufacture of low wines and spirits. If the malt tax were to 
be raised to eighteen shillings upon the quarter, it might be neces- 
sary to make some abatement in the different excises which are im- 
posed upon those particular sorts of low wines and spirits of which 
malt makes any part of the materials. In what are called Malt 
spirits, it makes commonly but a third part of the materials; the 
othet two-thirds being either raw barley, or one-third barley and 
one-third wheat. In the distillery of malt spirits, both the oppor- 
tunity and the temptation to smuggle, are much greater than either 
in a brewery or in a malt-house; the opportunity, on account of 
the smaller bulk and greater value of the commodity; and the 


cyder, 
verjuice, 
vinegar 
and mead. 


If the 
malt tax 
were 
raised, it 
would be 
proper to 
reduce the 
excises on 
wines and 
spirits 
contain- 
ingmalt. 


^°*Eds. r-3 read “was.’ 



but not so 
as to re- 
duce the 
price of 
spirits. 


Dr. Dave- 
nant ob- 
jects that 
the malt- 
ster’s 
profits 
would be 
unfairly 
taxed, and 
the rent 
and profit 
of barley 
land re- 
duced, 


S42 the wealth of nations 

temptation, on account of the superior height of the duties, which 
amount to 3^. upon the gallon of spirits. By increasing 

the duties upon malt, and reducing those upon the distillery, both 
the opportunities and the temptation to smuggle would be dimin- 
ished, which might occasion a still further augmentation of revenue. 

It has for some time past been the policy of Great Britain to dis- 
courage the consumption of spirituous liquors, on account of their 
supposed tendency to ruin the health and to corrupt the morals of 
the common people. According to this policy, the abatement of the 
taxes upon the distillery ought not to be so great as to reduce, in 
any respect, the price of those liquors. Spirituous liquors might re- 
main as dear as ever; while at the same time the wholesome and 
invigorating liquors of beer and ale might be considerably reduced 
in their price. The people might thus be in part relieved from one 
of the burdens of which they at present complain the most; while 
at the same time the revenue might be considerably augmented. 

The objections of Dr. Davenant to this alteration in the present 
system of excise duties, seem to be without foundation. Those ob- 
jections are, that the tax, instead of dividing itself as at present 
pretty equally upon the profiit of the maltster, upon that of the 
brewer, and upon that of the retailer, would, so far as it affected 
profit, fall altogether upon that of the maltster; that the maltster 
could not so easily get back the amount of the tax in the advanced 
price of his malt, as the brewer and retailer in the advanced price 
of their liquor; and that so heavy a tax upon malt might reduce 
the rent and profit of barley land.^®^ 

Though the duties directly imposed upon proof spirits amount only to 
2S. 6d. per gallon, these added to the duties upon the low wines, from which 
they are distilled, amount to 3s. lofd. Both low wines and proof spirits 
are, to prevent frauds, now rated according to what they gauge in the wash. 
This note appears first in ed. 3 ; ed. i reads “2s. 6d.” in file text instead of 
“ 3 S.IO id.” 

^Political and Commercial Works, ed. Sir Charles Whitworth, 1771, vol. 
i., pp. 222, 223. But Davenant does not confine the effect of the existing tax 
to the maltster, the brewer and the retailer. The tax, he says, “which seems 
to be upon malt, does not lie all upon that commodity, as is vulgarly 
thought. For a great many different persons contribute to the payment of 
this duty, before it comes into the Exchequer. First, the landlord, because 
of the excise, is forced to let his barley land at a lower rate ; and, upon the 
same score, the tenant must sell his barley at a less price; then the maltster 
bears his share, for because of the duty, he must abate something in the 
price of his malt, or keep it; in a proportion it likewise affects the hop 
merchant, the cooper, the collier, and all trades that have relation to the 
commodity. The retailers and brewers bear likewise a great share, whose 
gains of necessity will be less, because of that imposition; and, lastly, it 
comes heaviest of all upon the consumers.” If the duty were put upon the 
maltster, it would be “difficult for him to raise the price of a dear com- 
modity a full id at once: so that he must bear the greatest part of the 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^43 

No tax can ever reduce, for any considerable time, the rate of 
profit in any particular trade, which must always keep its level with 
other trades in the neighbourhood. The present duties upon malt, 
beer, and ale, do not affect the profits of the dealers in those com- 
modities, who all get back the tax with an additional profit, in the 
enhanced price of their goods. A tax indeed may render the goods 
upon which it is imposed so dear as to diminish the consumption of 
them. But the consumption of malt is in malt liquors; and a tax of 
eighteen shillings upon the quarter of malt could not well render 
those liquors dearer than the different taxes, amounting to twenty- 
four or twenty-five shillings, do at present. Those liquors, on the 
contrary, would probably become cheaper, and the consumption of 
them would be more likely to increase than to diminish. 

It is not very easy to understand why it should be more difficult 
for the maltster to get back eighteen shillings in the advanced price 
of his malt, than it is at present for the brewer to get back twenty- 
four or twenty-five, sometimes thirty shillings, in that of his liquor. 
The maltster, indeed, instead of a tax of six shillings, would be 
obliged to advance one of eighteen shillings upon every quarter of 
malt. But the brewer is at present obliged to advance a tax of 
twenty-four or twenty-five, sometimes thirty shillings upon every 
quarter of malt which he brews. It could not be more inconvenient 
for the maltster to advance a lighter tax, than it is at present for 
the brewer to advance a heavier one. The maltster doth not always 
keep in his granaries a stock of malt which it will require a longer 
time to dispose of, than the stock of beer and ale which the brewer 
frequently keeps in his cellars. The former, therefore, may fre- 
quently get the returns of his money as soon as the latter. But 
whatever inconveniency might arise to the maltster from being 
obliged to advance a heavier tax, it could easily be remedied by 
granting him a few months longer credit than is at present com- 
monly given to the brewer. 

Nothing could reduce the rent and profit of barley land which did 
not reduce the demand for barley. But a change of system, which 
reduced the duties upon a quarter of malt brewed into beer and ale 
from twenty-four and twenty-five shillings to eighteen shillings, 
would be more likely to increase than diminish that demand. The 
rent and profit of barley land, besides, must always be nearly equal 
to those of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated land. If 
they were less, some part of the barley land would soon be turned 

burden himself, or throw it upon the farmer, by giving less for barley, which 
brings the tax directly upon the land of England.” 

^'^^Ed. I does not contain “it.” 


but the 
change 
would 
make 
malt 
liquors 
cheaper, 
and so be 
likely to 
increase 
the con- 
sumption. 


and the 
maltster 
could re- 
cover 
eighteen 
shillings 
as easily 
as the 
brewer at 
present 
recovers 
twenty- 
four or 
thirty and 
might be 
given 
longer 
credit. 


The con- 
sumption 
of barley 
not being 
reduced, 
the rent 
and profit 
of barley 
land 

could not 



be re- 
duced, as 
there is no 
monop- 
oly 


The only 
sufferers 
would be 
those who 
brew for 
private 
use 


S44 THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

to some other purpose, and if they were greater, more land would 
soon be turned to the raising of barley. When the ordinary price of 
any particular produce of land is at what may be called a monopoly 
price, a tax upon it necessarily reduces the rent and profit of the 
land which grows it. A tax upon the produce of those precious vine- 
yards, of which the wine falls so much short of the effectual de- 
mand, that its price is always above the natural proportion to that 
of the produce of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated 
land, would necessaiOy reduce the rent and profit of those vine- 
yards. The price of the wines being already the highest that could 
be got for the quantity commonly sent to market, it could not be 
raised higher without diminishing that quantity; and the quantity 
could not be diminished without still greater loss, because the lands 
could not be turned to any other equally valuable produce. The 
whole weight of the tax, therefore, would fall upon the rent and 
profit; properly upon the rent of the vineyard. When it has been 
proposed to lay any new tax upon sugar, our sugar planters have 
frequently complained that the whole weight of such taxes fell, not 
upon the consumer, but upon the producer; they never having been 
able to raise the price of their sugar after the tax, higher than it was 
before. The price had, it seems, before the tax been a monopoly 
price; and the argument adduced to shew that sugar was an im- 
proper subject of taxation, demonstrated, perhaps, that it was a 
proper one; the gains of monopolists, whenever they can be come 
at, being certainly of all subjects the most proper. But the ordinary 
price of barley has never been a monopoly price; and the rent 
and profit of barley land have never been above their natural pro- 
portion to those of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated 
land. The different taxes which have been imposed upon malt, beer, 
and ale, have never lowered the price of barley; have never reduced 
the rent and profit of barley land. The price of malt to the brewer 
has constantly risen in proportion to the taxes imposed upon it; 
and those taxes, together with the different duties upon beer and 
ale, have constantly either raised the price, or what comes to the 
same thing, reduced the quality of those commodities to the con- 
sumer. The final payment of those taxes has fallen constantly upon 
the consumer, and not upon the producer. 

The only people likely to suffer by the change of system here pro- 
posed, are those who brew for their own private use. But the ex- 
emption, which this superior rank of people at present enjoy, from 
very heavy taxes which are paid by the poor labourer and artificer, 
is surely most unjust and unequal, and ought to be taken away, 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^45 

even though this change was never to take place. It has probably 
been the interest of this superior order of people, however, which 
has hitherto prevented a change of system that could not well fail 
both to increase the revenue and to relieve the people. 

Besides such duties as those of customs and excise above-men- Tolls on 
tioned, there are several others which affect the price of goods more 
unequally and more indirectly. Of this kind are the duties which in from 
French are called Peages, which in old Saxon times were called place to 
Duties of Passage, and which seem to have been originally estab- feet prices 

lished for the same purpose as our turnpike tolls, or the tolls upon unequal- 

our canals and navigable rivers, for the maintenance of the road or 
of the navigation. Those duties, when applied to such purposes, are 
most properly imposed according to the bulk or weight of the goods. 

As they were originally local and provincial duties, applicable to 
local and provincial purposes, the administration of them was in 
most cases entrusted to the particular town, parish, or lordship, in 
which they were levied; suA communities being in some way or 
other supposed to be accountable for the application. The sovereign, 
who is altogether unaccountable, has in many countries assumed to 
himself the administration of those duties; and though he has in 
most cases enhanced very much the duty, he has in many entirely 
neglected the application. If the turnpike tolls of Great Britain 
should ever become one of the resources of government, we may 
learn, by the example of many other nations, what would probably 
be the consequence. Such tolls are no doubt finally paid by the con- 
sumer; but the consumer is not taxed in proportion to his expence 
when he pays, not according to the value, but according to the bulk 
or weight of what he consumes. When such duties are imposed, not 
according to the bulk or weight, but according to the supposed 
value of the goods, they become properly a sort of inland customs or 
excises, which obstruct very much the most important of all branch- 
es of commerce, the interior commerce of the country. 

In some small states duties similar to those passage duties are Some 
imposed upon goods carried across the territory, either by land or countries 
by water, from one foreign country to another. These are in some 
countries called transit-duties. Some of the little Italian states, ’duties on 
which are situated upon the Po, and the rivers which run into it, 
derive some revenue from duties of this kind, which are paid alto- 
gether by foreigners, and which, perhaps, are the only duties 
that one state can impose upon the subjects of another, without 
obstructing in any respect the industry or commerce of its own. 

^ Ed, I reads “are perhaps.” 



Taxes on 
luxuries 
do not 
reach ab- 
sentees, 
but the 
fact that 
they are 
paid vol- 
untarily 
recom- 
mends 
them. 


846 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

The most important transit-duty in the world is that levied by the 
king of Denmark upon all merchant ships which pass through the 
Sound. 

Such taxes upon luxuries as the greater part of the duties of cus- 
toms and excise, though they all fall indifferently upon every 
different species of revenue, and are paid finally, or without any 
retribution, by whoever consumes the commodities upon which 
they are imposed, yet they do not always fall equally or propor- 
tionably upon the revenue of every individual. As every man^s hu- 
mour regulates the degree of his consumption, every man contrib- 
utes rather according to his humour than in proportion to his rev- 
enue; the profuse contribute more, the parsimonious less, than their 
proper proportion. During the minority of a man of great fortune, 
he contributes commonly very little, by his consumption, towards 
the support of that state from whose protection he derives a great 
revenue. Those who live in another country contribute nothing, by 
their consumption, towards the support of the government of that 
country, in which is situated the source of their revenue. If in this 
latter country there should be no land-tax, nor any considerable 
duty upon the transference either of moveable or of immoveable 
property, as in the case in Ireland, such absentees may derive a 
great revenue from the protection of a government to the support 
of which they do not contribute a single shilling. This inequality is 
likely to be greatest in a country of which the government is in some 
respects subordinate and dependent upon that of some other. The 
people who possess the most extensive property in the dependent, 
will in this case generally chuse to live in the governing country. 
Ireland is precisely in this situation, and we cannot therefore won- 
der that the proposal of a tax upon absentees should be so very 
popular in that country. It might, perhaps, be a little difficult to 
ascertain either what sort, or what degree of absence would sub- 
ject a man to be taxed as an absentee, or at what precise time the 
tax should either begin or end. If you except, however, this very 
peculiar situation, any inequality in the contribution of individ- 
uals, which can arise from such taxes, is much more than compen- 
sated by the very circumstance which occasions that inequality; 
the circumstance that every man’s contribution is altogether vol- 
untary ; it being altogether in his power either to consume or not to 
consume the commodity taxed. Where such taxes, therefore, are 
properly assessed and upon proper commodities, they are paid with 
less grumbling than any other. When they are advanced by the 
merchant or manufacturer, the consumer, who finally pays them, 

“^Ed. I does not contain “all.” 


^ Ed. I reads “should 



TA.XES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES S47 

soon com^s to confound them with the price of the commodities, 
and almost forgets that he pays any tax. 

Such taxes are or may be perfectly certain, or may be assessed so 
as to leave no doubt concerning either what ought to be paid, or 
when it ought to be paid ; concerning either the quantity or the time 
of payment. T^Tiatever uncertainty there may sometimes be, either 
in the duties of customs in Great Britain, or in other duties of the 
same kind in other countries, it cannot arise from the nature of 
those duties, but from the inaccurate or unskilful manner in which 
the law that imposes them is expressed. 

Taxes upon luxuries generally are, and always may be, paid 
piece-meal, or in proportion as the contributors have occasion to 
purchase the goods upon which they are imposed. In the time and 
mode of payment they are, or may be, of all taxes the most con- 
venient. Upon the whole, such taxes, therefore, are, perhaps, as 
agreeable to the three first of the four general maxims concerning 
taxation, as any other. They offend in every respect against the 
fourth. 

Such taxes, in proportion to what they bring into the public 
treasury of the state, always tate out or keep out of the pockets of 
the people more than almost any other taxes. They seem to do this 
in all the four different ways in which it is possible to do it. 

First, the levying of such taxes, even when imposed in the most 
judicious manner, requires a great number of customhouse and 
excise officers, whose salaries and perquisites are a real tax upon 
the people, which brings nothing into the treasury of the state. This 
expence, however, it must be acknowledged, is more moderate in 
Great Britain than in most other countries. In the year which end- 
ed on the fifth of July 1775, the gross produce of the different 
duties, under the management of the commissioners of excise in 
England, amounted to 185. which was levied at 

an expence of little more than five and a half per cent. From this 
gross produce, however, there must be deducted what was paid 
* away in bounties and drawbacks upon the exportation of exciseable 
goods, which will reduce the neat produce below five millions,^^^ 
The levying of the salt duty, an excise duty, but under a different 
management, is much more expensive. The neat revenue of the 
customs does not amount to two millions and a half, which is levied 
at an expence of more than ten per cent, in the salaries of officers, 
and other incidents. But the perquisites of customhouse officers are 

Ed. I reads “f 5 ) 479 j 695 7 s. lod.” 

The neat produce of that year, after deducting all expences and allow- 
ances, amounted to 4,975,652/, 19s. 6 d, This note appears first in ed. 2. 


They are 
also cer- 
tain 


and pay- 
able at 
conveni- 
ent times 


but take 
much 
more 
from the 
people 
than they 
yield to 
the state, 
since 

(r) the 
salaries 
and per- 
quisites of 
customs 
and 

excise of- 
ficers take 
a large 
propor- 
tion of 
what is 
collected; 



(2) par- 
ticuhr 
branches 
of indus- 
try are 
discour- 
aged; 


848 the wealth of nations 

every where miich greater than their salaries ; at some ports more 
than double or triple those salaries. If the salaries of officers, and 
other incidents, therefore, amount to more than ten per cent, upon 
the neat revenue of the customs; the whole expence of levying that 
revenue may amount, in salaries and perquisites together, to more 
than twenty or thirty per cent. The officers of excise receive few or 
no perquisites: and the administration of that branch of the revenue 
being of more recent establishment, is in general less corrupted than 
that of the customs, into which length of time has introduced and 
authorised many abuses. By charging upon malt the whole revenue 
which is at present levied by the different duties upon malt and malt 
liquors, a saving, it is supposed, of more than fifty thousand pounds 
might be made in the annual expence of the excise. By confining the 
duties of customs to a few sorts of goods, and by levying those 
duties according to the excise laws, a much greater saving might 
probably be made in the annual expence of the customs. 

Secondly, such taxes necessarily occasion some obstruction or 
discouragement to certain branches of industry. As they always 
raise the price of the commodity taxed, they so far discourage its 
consumption, and consequently its production. If it is a commodity 
of home growth or manufacture, less labour comes to be employed 
in raising and producing it. If it is a foreign commodity of which 
the tax increases in this manner the price, the commodities of the 
same kind which are made at home may thereby, indeed, gain some 
advantage in the home market, and a greater quantity of domestic 
industry may thereby be turned toward preparing them. But though 
this rise of price in a foreign commodity may encourage domestic 
industry in one particular branch, it necessarily discourages that 
industry in almost every other. The dearer the Birmingham manu- 
facturer buys his foreign wine, the cheaper he necessarily sells that 
part of his hardware with which, or, what comes to the same thing, 
with the price of which he buys it. That part of his hardware, there- 
fore, becomes of less value to him, and he has less encouragement to 
work at it. The dearer the consumers in one country pay for the 
surplus produce of another, the cheaper they necessarily sell that 
part of their own surplus produce with which, or, what comes to the 
same thing, with the price of which they buy it. That part of their 
own surplus produce becomes of less value to them, and they have 
less encouragement to increase its quantity. All taxes upon consum- 
able commodities, therefore, tend to reduce the quantity of produc- 
tive labour below what it otherwise would be, either in preparing 
the commodities taxed, if they are home commodities; or in pre- 
paring those with which they are purchased, if they are foreign 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^49 

commodities. Such taxes too always alter, more or less, the natural 
direction of national industry, and turn it into a channel always 
different from, and generally less advantageous than that in which 
it would have run of its own accord. 

Thirdly, the hope of evading such taxes by smuggling gives fre- 
quent occasion to forfeitures and other penalties, which entirely 
ruin the smuggler ; a person who, though no doubt highly blameable 
for violating the laws of his country, is frequently incapable of 
violating those of natural justice, and would have been, in every 
respect, an excellent citizen, had not the laws of his country made 
that a crime which nature never meant to be so. In those corrupted 
governments where there is at least a general suspicion of much un- 
necessary expence, and great misapplication of the public revenue, 
the laws which guard it are little respected. Not many people are 
scrupulous about smuggling, when, without perjury, they can find 
any easy and safe opportunity of doing so. To pretend to have any 
scruple about buying smuggled goods, though a manifest encourage- 
ment to the violation of the revenue laws, and to the perjury which 
almost slwaYS attends it, would in most countries be regarded as 
one of those pedantic pieces of hypocrisy which, instead of gaining 
credit with any body, serve only to expose the person who affects 
to practise them, to the suspicion of being a greater knave than 
most of his neighbours. By this indulgence of the public, the smug- 
gler is often encouraged to continue a trade which he is thus taught 
to consider as in some measure innocent; and when the severity of 
the revenue laws is ready to fall upon him, he is frequently disposed 
to defend with violence, what he has been accustomed to regard as 
his just property. From being at first, perhaps, rather imprudent 
than criminal, he at last too often becomes one of the hardiest and 
most determined violators of the laws of society. By the ruin of the 
smuggler, his capital, which had before been employed in maintain- 
ing productive labour, is absorbed either in the revenue of the state 
or in that of the revenue-officer, and is employed in maintaining un- 
productive, to the diminution of the general capital of the society, 
and of the useful industry which it might otherwise have main- 
tained. 

Fourthly, such taxes, by subjecting at least the dealers in the 
taxed commodities to the frequent visits and odious examination of 
the tax-gatherers, expose them sometimes, no doubt, to some de- 
gree of oppression, and always to much trouble and vexation; and 
though vexation, as has already been said,^^^ is not strictly speak- 
ing expence, it is certainly equivalent to the expence at which every 

Above, p 779 


(3) smug- 
^gis 
encour- 
aged; 


and (4) 
vexation 
equiva- 
lent to ex- 
pense is 
caused by 
the tax- 
gatherers’ 



examina- 
tions and 
visits. 


Great 

Britain 

suffers less 

than 

other 

countries 

from 

these in- 

conveni- 

encies. 

Duties on 
commodi- 
ties are 
some- 
times re- 
peated on 
each sale, 
as by the 
Spanish 
Alcavala, 


850 the wealth of nations 

man would be willing to redeem himself from it. The laws of excise, 
though more effectual for the purpose for which they were insti- 
tuted, are, in this respect, more vexatious than those of the customs. 
When a merchant has imported goods subject to certain duties of 
customs, when he has paid those duties, and lodged the goods in his 
warehouse, he is not in most cases liable to any further trouble or 
vexation from the customhouse officer. It is otherwise with goods 
subject to duties of excise. The dealers have no respite from the con- 
tinual visits and examination of the excise officers. The duties of ex- 
cise are, upon this account, more unpopular than those of the cus- 
toms ; and so are the officers who levy them. Those officers, it is pre- 
tended, though in general, perhaps, they do their duty fully as well 
as those of the customs; yet, as that duty obliges them to be fre- 
quently very troublesome to some of their neighbours, commonly 
contract a certain hardness of character which the others frequently 
have not. This observation, however, may very probably be the 
mere suggestion of fraudulent dealers, whose smuggling is either 
prevented or detected by their diligence. 

The inconveniencies, however, which are, perhaps, in some degree 
inseparable from taxes upon consumable commodities, fall as light 
upon the people of Great Britain as upon those of any other coun- 
try of which the government is nearly as expensive. Our state is not 
perfect, and might be mended; but it is as good or better than that 
of most of our neighbours. 

In consequence of the notion that duties upon consumable goods 
were taxes upon the profits of merchants, those duties have, in some 
countries, been repeated upon every successive sale of the goods. 
If the profits of the merchant importer or merchant manufacturer 
were taxed, equality seemed to require that those of all the middle 
buyers, who intervened between either of them and the consumer, 
should likewise be taxed. The famous Alcavala of Spain seems to 
have been established upon this principle. It was at first a tax of ten 
per cent., afterwards of fourteen per cent., and is at present of only 
six per cent, upon the sale of every sort of property, whether move- 
able or immoveable; and it is repeated every time the property is 
sold.^i® The levying of this tax requires a multitude of revenue-offi- 

“^Memoires concemant les Droits, &c. tom. i. p. 455. “La premiere 
branche, connue sous la denomination de Alcavala y Cientos, consiste dans 
un droit qui se pergoit sur toutes les choses mobiliaires et immobiliaires qui 
sont vendues, echangees et negocfe: ce droit qui dans le principe avoit tti 
fixe a quatorze pour cent a etk depuis reduit a six pour cent.” The rest of 
the information is probably from Uztariz, Theory and Practice of Com’- 
merce and Maritime Agairs, trans. by John Kippax, 1751, chap. 96, ad init., 
yol. u., p. 236. “It is so very oppressive as to lay 10 per cent, for the primi- 
tive Alcavala, and the four i per cents, annexed to it, a duty not only 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^5^ 

cers sufficient to guard the transportation of goods, not only from 
one province to another, but from one shop to another. It subjects, 
not only the dealers in some sorts of goods, but those in all sorts, 
every farmer, every manufacturer, every merchant and shop-keep- 
er, to the continual visits and examination of the tax-gatherers. 
Through the greater part of a country in which a tax of this kind 
is established, nothing can be produced for distant sale. The pro- 
duce of every part of the country must be proportioned to the con- 
sumption of the neighbourhood. It is to the Alcavala, accordingly, 
that Ustaritz imputes the ruin of the manufactures of Spain.^^^ He 
might have imputed to it likewise the declension of agriculture, it 
being imposed not only upon manufactures, but upon the rude pro- 
duce of the land. 

In the kingdom of Naples there is a similar tax of three per cent, 
upon the value of all contracts, and consequently upon that of all 
contracts of sale. It is both lighter than the Spanish tax, and the 
greater part of towns and parishes are allowed to pay a composition 
in lieu of it. They levy this composition in what manner they please, 
generally in a way that gives no interruption to the interior com- 
merce of the place. The Neapolitan tax, therefore, is not near so 
ruinous as the Spanish one. 

The uniform system of taxation, which, with a few exceptions of 
no great consequence, takes place in all the different parts of the 
united kingdom of Great Britain, leaves the interior commerce of 
the country, the inland and coasting trade, almost entirely free. 
The inland trade is almost perfectly free, and the greater part of 
goods may be carried from one end of the kingdom to the other, 
without requiring any permit or let-pass, without being subject to 
question, visit, or examination from the revenue officers. There are 
a few exceptions, but they are such as can give no intenuption to 
any important branch of the inland commerce of the country. 
Goods carried coastwise, indeed, require certificates or coast cock- 
ets. If you except coals, however, the rest are almost all duty-free. 
This freedom of interior commerce, the effect of the uniformity of 
the system of taxation, is perhaps one of the principal causes of the 
prosperity of Great Britain; every great country being necessarily 
the best and most extensive market for the greater part of the pro- 
ductions of its own industry. If the same freedom, in consequence 

chargeable on the first sale, but on every future sale of goods, I am jealous, 
it is one of the principal engines, that contributed to the ruin of most of 
our manufactures and trade. For though these duties are not charged to the 
full in some places, a heavy tax is paid.” 

“•'^See the preceding note. Uztariz’ opinion is quoted by Lord Karnes, 
Sketches oj the History of Man^ 1774, vol. i, p. 516. 


and the 3 
per cent, 
tax at 
Naples. 


Great ad- 
vantage is 
obtained 
by the 
uniform- 
ity of 
taxation 
in Great 
Britain. 



In France 
the diver- 
sity of 
taxes in 
different 
provinces 
occasions 
many 
hind- 
rances to 
internal 
trade, 


852 the wealth of nations 

of the same uniformity, could be extended to Ireland and the plan- 
tations, both the grandeur of the state and the prosperity of every 
part of the empire, would probably be still greater than at present. 

In France, the different revenue laws which take place in the dif- 
ferent provinces, require a multitude of revenue-officers to sur- 
round, not only the frontiers of the kingdom, but those of almost 
each particular province, in order either to prevent the importation 
of certain goods, or to subject it to the payment of certain duties, 
to the no small interruption of the interior commerce of the coun- 
try. Some provinces are allowed to compound for the gabelle or salt- 
tax. Others are exempted from it altogether. Some provinces are 
exempted from the exclusive sale of tobacco, which the tarmers- 
general enjoy through the greater part of the kingdom. The aids, 
which correspond to the excise in England, are very different in dif- 
ferent provinces. Some provinces are exempted from them, and pay 
a composition or equivalent. In those in which they take place and 
are in farm, there are many local duties which do not extend beyond 
a particular town or district. The Traites, which correspond to our 
customs, divide the kingdom into three great parts; first, the prov- 
inces subject to the tarif of 1664, which are called the provinces of 
the five great farms, and under which are comprehended Picardy, 
Normandy, and the greater part of the interior provinces of the 
kingdom; secondly, the provinces subject to the tarif of 1667, 
which are called the provinces reckoned foreign, and under which 
are comprehended the greater part of the frontier provinces; and, 
thirdly, those provinces which are said to be treated as foreign, or 
which, because they are allowed a free commerce with foreign 
countries, are in their commerce with the other provinces of France 
subjected to the same duties as other foreign countries. These are 
Alsace, the three bishopricks of Metz, Toul, and Verdun, and the 
three cities of Dunkirk, Bayonne, and Marseilles. Both in the prov- 
inces of the five great farms {called so on account of an ancient 
division of the duties of customs into five great branches, each of 
which was originally the subject of a particular farm, though they 
are now all united into one), and in those which are said to be 
reckoned foreign, there are many local duties which do not extend 
beyond a particular town or district. There are some such even in 
the provinces which are said to be treated as foreign, particularly 
in the city of Marseilles. It is unnecessary to observe how much, 
both the restraints upon the interior commerce of the country, and 
the number of the revenue officers must be multiplied, in order to 
guard the frontiers of those different provinces and districts, which 
are subject to such different systems of taxation. 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^53 

Over and above the general restraints arising from this compli- 
cated system of revenue laws, the commerce of wine, after corn 
perhaps the most important production of France, is in the greater 
part of the provinces subject to particular restraints, arising from 
the favour which has been shewn to the vineyards of particular 
provinces and districts, above those of others. The provinces most 
famous for their wines, it will be found, I believe, are those in 
which the trade in that article is subject to the fewest restraints of 
this kind. The extensive market which such provinces enjoy, en- 
courages good management both in the cultivation of their vine- 
yards, and in the subsequent preparation of their wines. 

Such various and complicated revenue laws are not peculiar to 
France. The little dutchy of Milan is divided into six provinces, in 
each of which there is a different system of taxation with regard to 
several different sorts of consumable goods. The still smaller terri- 
tories of the duke of Parma are divided into three or four, each of 
which has, in the same manner, a system of its own. Under such 
absurd management, nothing, but the great fertility of the soil and 
happiness of the climate, could preserve such countries from soon 
relapsing into the lowest state of poverty and barbarism. 

Taxes upon consumable commodities may either be levied by an 
administration of which the officers are appointed by government 
and are immediately accountable to government, of which the rev- 
enue must in this case vary from year to year, according to the oc- 
casional variations in the produce of the tax; or they may be let 
in farm for a rent certain, the farmer being allowed to appoint his 
own officers, who, though obliged to levy the tax in the manner di- 
rected by the law, are under his immediate inspection, and are im- 
mediately accountable to him. The best and most frugal way of 
levying a tax can never be by farm. Over and above what is neces- 
sary for paying the stipulated rent, the salaries of the officers, and 
the whole expense of administration, the farmer must always draw 
from the produce of the tax a certain profit proportioned at least 
to the advance which he makes, to the risk which he runs, to the 
trouble which he is at, and to the knowledge and skill which it re- 
quires to manage so very complicated a concern. Government, by 
establishing an administration under their own immediate inspec- 
tion, of the same kind with that which the farmer establishes, might 
at least save this profit, which is almost always exorbitant. To farm 
any considerable branch of the public revenue, requires either a 
great capital or a great credit; circumstances which would alone 
restrain the competition for such an undertaking to a very small 
number of people. Of the few who have this capital or credit, a still 


and the 
commerce 
in wine is 
subject to 
particular 
restraints. 


Milan 
and 
Parma 
are still 
more ab- 
surdly 
managed 


The col- 
lection of 
taxes by 
govern- 
ment offi- 
cers is 
much su- 
perior to 
letting the 
taxes to 
farm. 



Farmers 
of taxes 
require 
sanguin- 
ary reve- 
nue laws. 


Taxation 
by mo- 
nopolies 
let to 
farm is 
even 
worse. 


S54 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

smaller number have the necessary knowledge or experience; an- 
other circumstance which restrains the competition still further. 
The very few, who are in condition to become competitors, find it 
more for their interest to combine together; to become co-partners 
instead of competitors, and when the farm is set up to auction, to 
offer no rent, but what is much below the real value. In countries 
where the public revenues are in farm, the farmers are generally 
the most opulent people. Their wealth would alone excite the pub- 
lic indignation, and the vanity which almost always accompanies 
such upstart fortunes, the foolish ostentation with which they com- 
monly display that wealth, excites that indignation still more. 

The farmers of the public revenue never find the laws too severe, 
which punish any attempt to evade the payment of a tax. They 
have no bowels for the contributors, who are not their subjects, and 
whose universal bankruptcy, if it should happen the day after their 
farm is expired, would not much affect their interest. In the great- 
est exigencies of the state, when the anxiety of the sovereign for the 
exact payment of his revenue is necessarily the greatest, they sel- 
dom fail to complain that without laws more rigorous than those 
which actually take place, it will be impossible for them to pay 
even the usual rent. In those moments of public distress their de- 
mands cannot be disputed. The revenue laws, therefore, become 
gradually more and more severe. The most sanguinary are always 
to be found in countries where the greater part of the public rev- 
enue is in farm. The mildest, in countries where it is levied under 
the immediate inspection of the sovereign. Even a bad sovereign 
feels more compassion for his people than can ever be expected 
from the farmers of his revenue. He knows that the permanent 
grandeur of his family depends upon the prosperity of his people^ 
and he will never knowingly ruin that prosperity for the sake of 
any momentary interest of his own. It is otherwise with the farm- 
ers of his revenue, whose grandeur may frequently be the effect of 
the ruin, and not of the prosperity of his people. 

A tax is sometimes, not only farmed for a certain rent,^^^ but the 
farmer has, besides, the monopoly of the commodity taxed. In 
France, the duties upon tobacco and salt are levied in this man- 
ner, In such cases the farmer, instead of one, levies two exorbitant 
profits upon the people; the profit of the farmer, and the still more 
exorbitant one of the monopolist. Tobacco being a luxury, every 
man is allowed to buy or not to buy as he chuses. But salt being a 
necessary, every man is obliged to buy of the farmer a certain 
quantity of it; because, if he did not buy this quantity of the farm- 

^^Ed. I reads ‘‘rent certain.” ^“Ed. i reads “the taxes.” 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^55 

er, he would, it is presumed, buy it of some smuggler. The taxes 
upon both commodities are exorbitant. The temptation to smug- 
gle consequently is to many people irresistible, while at the same 
time the rigour of the law, and the vigilance of the farmer’s officers, 
render the 3delding to that temptation almost certainly ruinous. 
The smuggling of salt and tobacco sends every year several hun- 
dred people to the gallies, besides a very considerable number 
whom it sends to the gibbet. Those taxes levied in this manner yield 
a very considerable revenue to government. In 1767, the farm of 
tobacco was let for twenty-two millions five hundred and forty- 
one thousand two hundred and seventy-eight livres a year. That 
of salt, for thirty-six millions four hundred and ninety-two thou- 
sand four hundred and four livres. The farm in both cases was to 
commence in 1768, and to last for six years. Those who consider 
the blood of the people as nothing in comparison with the revenue 
of the prince, may perhaps approve of this method of levying taxes. 
Similar taxes and monopolies of salt and tobacco have been es- 
tablished in many other countries; particularly in the Austrian and 
Prussian dominions, and in the greater part of the states of Italy. 

In France, the greater part of the actual revenue of the crown is 
derived from eight different sources; the taille, the capitation, the 
two vingtiemes, the gabelles, the aides, the traites, the domaine, 
and the farm of tobacco. The five last are, in the greater part of the 
provinces, under farm. The three first are every where levied by an 
administration under the immediate inspection and direction of 
government, and it is universally acknowledged that, in proportion 
to what they take out of the pockets of the people, they bring more 
into the treasury of the prince than the other five, of which the ad- 
ministration is much more wasteful and expensive. 

The finances of France seem, in their present state, to admit of 
three very obvious reformations. First, by abolishing the taille and 
the capitation, and by encreasing the number of vingtiemes, so as 
to produce an additional revenue equal to the amount of those 
other taxes, the revenue of the crown might be preserved; the ex- 
pence of collection might be much diminished; the vexation of the 
inferior ranks of people, which the taille and capitation occasion, 
might be entirely prevented; and the superior ranks might not be 
more burdened than the greater part of them are at present. The 
vingtieme, I have already observed, is a tax very nearly of the 
same kind with what is called the land-tax of England. The burden 
of the taille, it is acknowledged, falls finally upon the proprietors 
of land; and as the greater part of the capitation is assessed upon 

^ Above, p. 809. 


In France 
the three 
branches 
of reve- 
nue which 
are levied 
by gov- 
ernment 
officers 
are much 
more eco- 
nomical. 

The taille 
and capi- 
tations 
should be 
abolished, 
the vingt- 
iemes in- 
creased, 
the taxes 
on com- 
modities 
made uni^ 
form, and 
farming 
aboUshed 



The 
French 
system is 
in every 
respect 
inferior 
to the 
British. 


ss6 the wealth of nations 

those who are subject to the taille at so much a pound of that other 
tax, the final payment of the greater part of it must likewise fall 
upon the same order of people. Though the number of the ving* 
tiemes, therefore, was increased so as to produce an additional rev- 
enue equal to the amount of both those taxes, the superior ranks of 
people might not be more burdened than they are at present. Many 
individuals no doubt would, on account of the great inequalities 
with which the taille is commonly assessed upon the estates and 
tenants of different individuals. The interest and opposition of 
such favoured subjects are the obstacles most likely to prevent this 
or any other reformation of the same kind. Secondly, by rendering 
the gabelle, the aides, the traites,^^^ the taxes upon tobacco, all the 
different customs and excises, uniform in all the different parts 
of the kingdom, those taxes might be levied at much less expence, 
and the interior commerce of the kingdom might be rendered as 
free as that of England. Thirdly, and lastly, by subjecting all those 
taxes to an administration under the immediate inspection and di- 
rection of government, the exorbitant profits of the farmers general 
might be added to the revenue of the state. The opposition arising 
from the private interest of individuals, is likely to be as effectual 
for preventing the two last as the first mentioned scheme of 
reformation. 

The French system of taxation seems, in every respect, inferior 
to the British. In Great Britain ten millions sterling are annually 
levied upon less than eight millions of people, without its being 
possible to say that any particular order is oppressed. From the 
collections of the Abbe Expilly,^^^ and the observations of the au- 
thor of the Essay upon the legislation and commerce of corn,^^^ it 
appears probable, that France, including the provinces of Lorraine 
and Bar, contains about twenty-three or twenty-four millions of 
people; three times the number perhaps contained in Great Britain. 
The soil and climate of France are better than those of Great Brit- 
ain. The country has been much longer in a state of improvement 


^ Ed. I does not contain “the traites.” 

These estimates seem to have been quoted in England at the time, since 
the Continuation of Anderson’s Commerce, under the year 1773, mentions 
“the calculations of the Abbe D’Expilly published about this time in Paris,” 
which gave 8,661,381 births and 6,664,161 deaths as the number taking place 
in the nine years, 1754 to 1763, in France, inclusive of Lorraine and Bar. 
In his Dictionnaire giographique, historique et politique des Gaules et de 
la France, tom. v. (1768), sv. Population, Expilly estimated the population 
at 22,014,337. See Levasseur, La Population Jrangaise, tom. i., 1889, PPt- 215 
and 216 note 

'^Sur la Ugislation et le commerce des grains (by Necker), 1775, ch viii, 
estimates the population at 24,181,333 by the method of multiplying the 
deaths by 31. 



TAXES UPON CONSUMABLE COMMODITIES ^57 

and cultivation, and is, upon that account, better stocked with all 
those things which it requires a long time to raise up and accumu- 
late, such as great towns, and convenient and well-built houses, 
both in town and country. With these advantages, it might be ex- 
pected that in France a revenue of thirty millions might be levied 
for the support of the state, with as little inconveniency as a rev- 
enue of ten millions is in Great Britain. In 1765 and 1766, the 
whole revenue paid into the treasury of France, according to the 
best, though, I acknowledge, very imperfect, accounts which I 
could get of it, usually run between 308 and 325 millions of livres; 
that is, it did not amount to fifteen millions sterling; not the half 
of what might have been expected, had the people contributed in 
the same proportion to their numbers as the people of Great Brit- 
ain. The people of France, however, it is generally acknowledged, 
are much more oppressed by taxes than the people of Great Britain. 
France, however, is certainly the great empire in Europe which, 
after that of Great Britain, enjoys the mildest and most indulgent 
government. 

In Holland the heavy taxes upon the necessaries of life have 
ruined, it is said, their principal manufactures, and are likely to 
discourage gradually even their fisheries and their trade in ship- 
building. The taxes upon the necessaries of life are inconsiderable 
in Great Britain, and no manufacture has hitherto been ruined by 
them. The British taxes which bear hardest on manufactures are 
some duties upon the importation of raw materials, particularly 
upon that of raw silk. The revenue of the states general and of the 
different cities, however, is said to amount to more than five mil- 
lions two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling; and as the 
inhabitants of the United Provinces cannot well be supposed to 
amount to more than a third part of those of Great Britain, they 
must, in proportion to their number, be much more heavily taxed. 

After all the proper subjects of taxation have been exhausted, if 
the exigencies of the state still continue to require new taxes, they 
must be imposed upon improper onesP^ The taxes upon the neces- 
saries of life, therefore, may be no impeachment of the wisdom of 
that republic, which, in order to acquire and to maintain its inde- 
pendency, has, in spite of its great frugality, been involved in such 
expensive wars as have obliged it to contract great debts. The sin- 
gular countries of Holland and Zealand, besides, require a consider- 
able expence even to preserve their existence, or to prevent their 
being swallowed up by the sea, which must have contributed to 
increase considerably the load of taxes in those two provinces. The 

^ Below, p. 881. 


In Hol- 
land 
heavy 
taxes on 
neces- 
saries 
have 
ruined 
manufac- 
tures. 


But per- 
haps Hol- 
land has 
done the 
best 

possible. 


Above, pp. 826, 827. 



858 the wealth OF NATIONS 

republican form of government seems to be the principal support 
of the present grandeur of Holland. The owners of great capitals, 
the great mercantile families, have generally either some direct 
share, or some indirect influence, in the administration of that gov- 
ernment. For the sake of the respect and authority which they de- 
rive from this situation, they are willing to live in a country where 
their capital, if they employ it themselves, will bring them less pro- 
fit, and if they lend it to another, less interest; and where the very 
moderate revenue which they can draw from it will purchase less 
of the necessaries and conveniencies of life than in any other part 
of Europe. The residence of such wealthy people necessarily keeps 
alive, in spite of all disadvantages, a certain degree of industry in 
the country. Any public calamity which should destroy the repub- 
lican form of government, which should throw the whole adminis- 
tration into the hands of nobles and of soldiers, which should anni- 
hilate altogether the importance of those wealthy merchants would 
soon render it disagreeable to them to live in a country where they 
were no longer likely to be much respected. They would remove 
both their residence and their capital to some other country, and 
the industry and commerce of Holland would soon follow the cap- 
itals which supported them. 



CHAPTER III 


OF PUBLIC DEBTS 

In that rude state of society which precedes the extension of com- 
merce and the improvement of manufactures, when those expen- 
sive luxuries which commerce and manufactures can alone intro- 
duce, are altogether unknown, the person who possesses a large 
revenue, I have endeavoured to show in the third book of this In- 
quiry,^ can spend or enjoy that revenue in no other way than by 
maintaining nearly as many people as it can maintain. A large rev- 
enue may at all times be said to consist in the command of a large 
quantity of the necessaries of life. In that rude state of things it is 
commonly paid in a large quantity of those necessaries, in the ma- 
terials of plain food and coarse clothing, in corn and cattle, in wool 
and raw hides. When neither commerce nor manufactures furnish 
any thing for which the owner can exchange the greater part of 
those materials which are over and above his own consumption, he 
can do nothing with the surplus but feed and clothe nearly as many 
people as it will feed and clothe. A hospitality in which there is no 
luxury, and a liberality in which there is no ostentation, occasion, 
in this situation of things, the principal expences of the rich and the 
great. But these, I have likewise endeavoured to show in the same 
book, 2 are expences by which people are not very apt to ruin them- 
selves. There is not, perhaps, any selfish pleasure so frivolous, of 
which the pursuit has not sometimes ruined even sensible men. A 
passion for cock-fighting has ruined many. But the instances, I be- 
lieve, are not very numerous of people who have been ruined by a 
hospitality or liberality of this kind; though the hospitality of lux- 
ury and the liberality of ostentation have ruined many. Among our 
feudal ancestors, the long time during which estates used to con- 
tinue in the same family, sufficiently demonstrates the general dis- 
position of people to live within their income. Though the rustic 
hospitality, constantly exercised by the great land-holders, may 

® Above, p. 391 
859 


When ex- 
pensive 
luxuries 
are un- 
known, 
persons 
with large 
revenue 
are likely 
to hoard 
savings 


^ Above, pp. 38s, 386, 



86o 


So the 
ancient 
sover- 
eigns of 
Europe 
amassed 
treasures. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

not, to us in the present time#, seem consistent with that order, 
which we are apt to consider as inseparably connected with good 
(economy, yet we must certainly allow them to have been at least 
so far frugal as not commonly to have spent their whole income. A 
part of their wool and raw hides they had generally an opportunity 
of selling for money. Some part of this money, perhaps, they spent 
in purchasing the few objects of vanity and luxury, with which the 
circumstances of the times could furnish them; but some part of it 
they seem commonly to have hoarded. They could not well indeed 
do an 3 d;hing else but hoard whatever money they saved. To trade 
was disgraceful to a gentleman, and to lend money at interest, 
which at that time was considered as usury and prohibited by law, 
would have been still more so. In those times of violence and dis- 
order, besides, it was convenient to have a hoard of money at hand, 
that in case they should be driven from their own home, they might 
have something of known value to carry with them to some place of 
safety. The same violence, which made it convenient to hoard, 
made it equally convenient to conceal the hoard. The frequency of 
treasure-trove, or of treasure found of which no owner was known, 
sufficiently demonstrates the frequency in those times both of 
hoarding and of concealing the hoard. Treasure-trove was then 
considered as an important branch of the revenue of the sovereign.*"^ 
All the treasure-trove of the kingdom would scarce perhaps in the 
present times make an important branch of the revenue of a pri- 
vate gentleman of a good estate. 

The same disposition to save and to hoard prevailed in the sover- 
eign, as well as in the subjects. Among nations to whom commerce 
and manufactures are little known, the sovereign, it has already 
been observed in the fourth book,^ is in a situation which naturally 
disposes him to the parsimony requisite for accumulation. In that 
situation the expence even of a sovereign cannot be directed by that 
vanity which delights in the gaudy finery of a court. The ignorance 
of the times affords but few of the trinkets in which that finery con- 
sists. Standing armies are not then necessary, so that the expence 
even of a sovereign, like that of any other great lord, can be em- 
ployed in scarce any thing but bounty to his tenants, and hospital- 
ity to his retainers. But bounty and hospitality very seldom lead 
to extravagance; though vanity almost always does.® All the an- 
cient sovereigns of Europe accordingly, it has already been ob- 
served, had treasures. Every Tartar chief in the present times is 
said to have one. 

®Cp. pp. 268, 269. ^ Above, p. 414. 

" Repeated verbatim from p. 414. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 

In a commercial country abounding with every sort of expensive 
luxury, the sovereign, in the same manner as almost all the great 
proprietors in his dominions, naturally spends a great part of his 
revenue in purchasing those luxuries. His own and the neighbour- 
ing countries supply him abundantly with all the costly trinkets 
which compose the splendid, but insignificant pageantry of a court. 
For the sake of an inferior pageantry of the same kind, his nobles 
dismiss their retainers, make their tenants independent, and be- 
come gradually themselves as insignificant as the greater part of 
the wealthy burghers in his dominions. The same frivolous passions, 
which influence their conduct, influence his. How can it be supposed 
that he should be the only rich man in his dominions who is insen- 
sible to pleasures of this kind? If he does not, what he is very likely 
to do, spend upon those pleasures so great a part of his revenue as 
to debilitate very much the defensive power of the state, it cannot 
well be expected that he should not spend upon them all that part 
of it which is over and above what is necessary for supporting that 
defensive power. His ordinary expence becomes equal to his ordi- 
nary revenue, and it is well if it does not frequently exceed it. The 
amassing of treasure can no longer be expected, and when extra- 
ordinary exigencies require extraordinary expences, he must neces- 
sarily call upon his subjects for an extraordinary aid. The present 
and the late king of Prussia are the only great princes of Europe, 
who, since the death of Henry IV. of France in i6io, are supposed 
to have amassed any considerable treasure.® The parsimony which 
leads to accumulation has become almost as rare in republican as in 
monarchical governments. The Italian republics, the United Prov- 
inces of the Netherlands, are all in debt. The canton of Berne is the 
single republic in Europe which has amassed any considerable treas- 
ure.^ The other Swiss republics have not. The taste for some sort 
of pageantry, for splendid buildings, at least, and other public orna- 
ments, frequently prevails as much in the apparently sober senate- 
house of a little republic, as in the dissipated court of the greatest 
king. 

The want of parsimony in time of peace, imposes the necessity of 
contracting debt in time of war. When war comes, there is no money 
in the treasury but what is necessary for carrying on the ordinary 
expence of the peace establishment. In war an establishment of 
three or four times that expence becomes necessary for the defence 
of the state, and consequently a revenue three or four times greater 
than the peace revenue. Supposing that the sovereign should have, 
what he scarce ever has, the immediate means of augmenting his 

” Above, p. 410. ’Above, p. 772. 


When 
luxuries 
are intro- 
duced, the 
sover- 
eign’s ex- 
penditure 
equals his 
revenue 
in time of 
peace, 


and in 
time of 
war he 
contracts 
debts. 



862 


THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 


The same 
causes 
which 
make bor- 
rowing 
necessary 
make it 
possible 
Mer- 
chants 
and 

manufac- 
turers are 
able to 
lend, 


and also 
wilKng. 


revenue in proportion to the augmentation of his expence, yet still 
the produce of the taxes, from which this increase of revenue must 
be drawn, will not begin to come into the treasury till perhaps ten 
or twelve months after they are imposed. But the moment in which 
war begins, or rather the moment in which it appears likely to be- 
gin, the army must be augmented, the fleet must be fitted out, the 
garrisoned towns must be put into a posture of defence; that army, 
that fleet, those garrisoned towns must be furnished with arms, am- 
munition, and provisions. An immediate and great expence must be 
incurred in that moment of immediate danger, which will not wait 
for the gradual and slow returns of the new taxes. In this exigency 
government can have no other resource but in borrowing. 

The same commercial state of society which, by the operation of 
moral causes, brings government in this manner into the necessity 
of borrowing, produces in the subjects both an ability and an in- 
clination to lend. If it commonly brings along with it the necessity 
of borrowing, it likewise brings along ® with it the facility of doing 
so. 

A country abounding with merchants and manufacturers, neces- 
sarily abounds with a set of people through whose hands not only 
their own capitals, but the capitals of all those who either lend them 
money, or trust them with goods, pass as frequently, or more fre- 
quently, than the revenue of a private man, who, without trade or 
business, lives upon his income, passes through his hands. The rev- 
enue of such a man can regularly pass through his hands only once 
in a year. But the whole amount of the capital and credit of a mer- 
chant, who deals in a trade of which the returns are very quick, 
may sometimes pass through his hands two, three, or four times in 
a year. A country abounding with merchants and manufacturers, 
therefore, necessarily abounds with a set of people who have it at 
all times in their power to advance, if they chuse to do so, a very 
large sum of money to government. Hence the ability in the subjects 
of a commercial state to lend. 

Commerce and manufactures can seldom flourish long in any 
state which does not enjoy a regular administration of justice, in 
which the people do not feel themselves secure in the possession of 
their property, in which the faith of contracts is not supported by 
law, and in which the authority of the state is not supposed to be 
regularly employed in enforcing the payment of debts from all 
those who are able to pay. Commerce and manufactures, in short, 
can seldom flourish in any state in which there is not a certain de- 
gree of confidence in the justice of government. The same confi- 

® Ed 5 omits “along,” doubtless by a misprint 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^^3 

dence which disposes great merchants and manufacturers, upon or- 
dinary occasions, to trust their property to the protection of a par- 
ticular government; disposes them, upon extraordinary occasions, 
to trust that government with the use of their property. By lending 
money to government, they do not even for a moment diminish 
their ability to carry on their trade and manufactures. On the con- 
trary, they commonly augment it. The necessities of the state ren- 
der government upon most occasions willing to borrow upon terms 
extremely advantageous to the lender. The security which it grants 
to the original creditor, is made transferable to any other creditor, 
and, from, the universal confidence in the justice of the state, gen- 
erally sells in the market for more than was originally paid for it. 
The merchant or monied man makes money by lending money to 
government, and instead of diminishing, increases his trading capi- 
tal. He generally considers it as a favour, therefore, when the ad- 
ministration admits him to a share in the first subscription for a 
new loan. Hence the inclination or willingness in the subjects of a 
commercial state to lend. 

The government of such a state is very apt to repose itself upon 
this ability and willingness of its subjects to lend it their money on 
extraordinary occasions. It foresees the facility of borrowing, and 
therefore dispenses itself from the duty of saving. 

In a rude state of society there are no great mercantile or manu- 
facturing capitals. The individuals, who hoard whatever money they 
can save, and who conceal their hoard, do so from a distrust of the 
justice of government, from a fear that if it was known that they 
had a hoard, and where that hoard was to be found, they would 
quickly be plundered. In such a state of things few people would be 
able, and no body would be willing, to lend their money to govern- 
ment on extraordinary exigencies. The sovereign feels that he must 
provide for such exigencies by saving, because he foresees the abso- 
lute impossibility of borrowing. This foresight increases still fur- 
ther his natural disposition to save. 

The progress of the enormous debts which at present oppress, and 
will in the long-run probably ruin, all the great nations of Europe, 
has been pretty uniform. Nations, like private men, have generally 
begun to borrow upon what may be called personal credit, without 
assigning or mortgaging any particular fund for the payment of the 
debt; and when this resource has failed them, they have gone on to 
borrow upon assignments or mortgages of particular funds. 

What is called the unfunded debt of Great Britain, is contracted 
in the former of those two ways. It consists partly in a debt which 
bears, or is supposed to bear, no interest, and which resembles the 


A govern- 
ment dis- 
penses it- 
self from 
saving if 
it knows 
it can 
borrow, 

whereas if 
there is no 
possibility 
of bor- 
rowing, it 
feels it 
must 
save. 


Nations 
have be- 
gun to 
borrow 
without 
special 
security 
and have 
after- 
wards 
mort- 
gaged 
particular 
funds. 



THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


The un- 
funded 
debt of 
Great 
Britain is 
con- 
tracted in 
the first 
way. 


Mort- 
gages of 
particular 
branches 
of reve- 
nue are 
either for 
a term of 
years, 
when 
money is 
said to be 
raised by 


S64 

debts that a private man contracts upon account; and partly in a 
debt which bears interest, and which resembles what a private man 
contracts upon his bill or promissory note. The debts which are due 
either for extraordinary services, or for services either not provided 
for, or not paid at the time when they are performed; part of the 
extraordinaries of the army, navy, and ordnance, the arrears of sub- 
sidies to foreign princes, tiose of seamen’s wages, &c. usually con- 
stitute a debt of the first kind. Navy and Exchequer bills, which 
are issued sometimes in payment of a part of such debts and some- 
times for other purposes, constitute a debt of the second kind; Ex- 
chequer bills bearing interest from the day on which they are issued, 
and navy bills six months after they are issued. The bank of Eng- 
land, either by voluntarily discounting those bills at their current 
value, or by agreeing with government for certain considerations to 
circulate Exchequer bills, that is, to receive them at par, paying 
the interest which happens to be due upon them, keeps up their 
value and facilitates their circulation, and thereby frequently en- 
ables government to contract a very large debt of this kind. In 
France, where there is no bank, the state bills (billets d’etat 
have sometimes sold at sixty and seventy per cent, discount. Dur- 
ing the great re-coinage in King William’s time, when the bank of 
England thought proper to put a stop to its usual transactions, Ex- 
chequer bills and tallies are said to have sold from twenty-five to 
sixty per cent, discount; owing partly, no doubt, to the supposed 
instability of the new government established by the Revolution, 
but partly too to the want of the support of the bank of England. 

TOen this resource* is exhausted, and it becomes necessary, in or- 
der to raise money, to assign or mortgage some particular branch of 
the public revenue for the payment of the debt, government has up- 
on different occasions done this in two different ways. Sometimes it 
has made this assignment or mortgage for a short period of time 
only, a year, or a few years, for example; and sometimes for per- 
petuity. In the one case, the fund was supposed sufficient to pay, 
within the limited time, both principal and interest of the money 
borrowed. In the other, it was supposed sufficient to pay the inter- 
est only, or a perpetual annuity equivalent to the interest, govern- 

®See Examen des Reflexions politiques sur les Finances. P. J. Duverney, 
Examen du Uvre intitide Reflexions politiques sur les finances et le com- 
merce (by Du Tot), tom. i., p. 225. 

James Postlethwayt, History of the Public Revenue, 1759, PP i 5 j 
mentions discounts of 25 and 55 per cent. The discount varied with the 
priority of the tallies and did not measure the national credit in general, but 
the probability of particular taxes bringing in enough to pay the amounts 
charged upon them. See also above, p. 302. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


865 

merit being at liberty to redeem at any time this annuity, upon pay- 
ing back the principal sum borrowed. When money was raised in 
the one way, it was said to be raised by anticipation; when in the 
other, by perpetual funding, or, more shortly, by funding. 

In Great Britain the annual land and malt taxes are regularly 
anticipated every year, by virtue of a borrowing clause constantly 
inserted into the acts which impose them. The bank of England gen- 
erally advances at an interest, which since the Revolution has varied 
from eight to three per cent, the sums for which those taxes are 
granted, and receives payment as their produce gradually comes in. 
If there is a deficiency, which there always is, it is provided for in 
the supplies of the ensuing year. The only considerable branch of 
the public revenue which yet remains unmortgaged is thus regular- 
ly spent before it comes in. Like an improvident spendthrift, 
whose pressing occasions will not allow him to wait for the regular 
payment of his revenue, the state is in the constant practice of bor- 
rowing of its own factors and agents, and of paying interest for 
the use of its own money. 

In the reign of king William, and during a great part of that of 
queen Anne, before we had become so familiar as we are now with 
the practice of perpetual funding, the greater part of the new taxes 
were imposed but for a short period of time (for four, five, six, or 
seven years only), and a great part of the grants of every year con- 
sisted in loans upon anticipations of the produce of those taxes. The 
produce being frequently insufficient for paying within the limited 
term the principal and interest of the money borrowed, deficiencies 
arose, to mal^e good which it became necessary to prolong the term. 

In 1697, by the 8th of William III. c. 20. the deficiencies of sev- 
eral taxes were charged upon what was then called the first general 
mortgage or fund, consisting of a prolongation to the first of Au- 
gust, 1706, of several different taxes, which would have expired 
within a shorter term, and of which the produce was accumulated 
Into one general fund. The deficiencies charged upon this prolonged 
Term amounted to S;i6o,459/. 145. 

In 1701, those duties, with some others, were still further pro- 
longed for the like purposes till the first of August, 1710, and were 
called the second general mortgage or fund.’’® The deficiencies 
charged upon it amounted to 2,055,999^ 7^. ii\d. 

In 1707, those duties were still further prolonged, as a fund for 
new loans, to the first of August, 1712, and were called the third 

^^Ed. I reads “unprovident/’ as do all editions below, p. 867. 

Postlelhwayt, op. cit., p. 38. Ed. 5 misprints “9§d.” 

“ Postlethwayt, op. p. 40. 


anticipa- 
tion, or in 
perpetu- 
ity, when 
it is said 
to be 
raised by 
funding. 

The an- 
nual land 
and malt 
taxes are 
always 
anticipat- 
ed. 


Under 
William 
III. and 
Anne an- 
ticipa- 
tions gave 
rise to de- 
ficiencies, 


and the 
term of 
the mort- 
gage taxes 
was pro- 
longed in 
1697, 


in 1701, 


in 1707, 



866 


in 1708, 


in 1709, 


and in 
1710. 


In 1711 
the taxes 
were con- 
tinued for 
ever and 
made into 
a fund for 
paying 
the inter- 
est on i9,- 
177,968. 

The only 
earlier 
taxes im- 
posed in 
perpetu- 
ity to pay 
interest 
on debt 
were 
those for 
paying 
interest 
on the 
advances 
of the 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed upon it was 983,254/. 
us. g^d. 

In 1708, those duties were all (except the old subsidy of tonnage 
and poundage, of which one moiety only was made a part of this 
fund, and a duty upon the importation of Scotch linen, which had 
been taken off by the articles of union) still further continued, as a 
fund for new loans, to the first of August, 1714, and were called the 
fourth general mortgage or fund.^^ The sum borrowed upon it was 
925,176/. 9^. 

In 1709, those duties were all (except the old subsidy of tonnage 
and poundage, which was now left out of this fund altogether) still 
further continued for the same purpose to the first of August, 1716 
and were called the fifth general mortgage or fund.^^ The sum bor- 
rowed upon it was 922,029/. 6^. od. 

In 1710, those duties were again prolonged to the first of August, 
1720, and were called the sixth general mortgage or fund.^^ The 
sum borrowed upon it was 1,296,552/. gs. iifrf. 

In 1711, the same duties (which at this time were thus subject 
to four different anticipations), together with several others, were 
continued for ever, and made a fund for paying the interest of the 
capital of the South Sea company, which had that year advanced 
to government, for paying debts and making good deficiencies, the 
sum of 9,177,967/. 1 5^. 4^.; the greatest loan which at that time 
had ever been made. 

Before this period, the principal, so far as I have been able to 
observe, the only taxes which in order to pay the interest of a debt 
had been imposed for perpetuity, were those for paying the interest 
of the money which had been advanced to government by the Bank 
and East India Company, and of what it was expected would be 
advanced, ‘but which was never advanced, by a projected land 
bank. The bank fund at this time amounted to 3,375,027/. 175. 
lo^d. for which was paid an annuity or interest of 206,501/. 13^. 
5^.^^ The East India fund amounted to 3,200,000/. for which was 
paid an annuity or interest of 160,000/.; the bank fund being at 
six per cent.,^^ the East India fund at five per cent, interest. 

In 1715, by the first of George I. c. 12. the different taxes which 
had been mortgaged for paying the bank annuity, together with sev- 

p. 59. ^Ibid., pp. 63, 64. ^"^Ibid., p. 68. 

^'^Ibid.^ p. 71. ^Ibid.f p. 311. 

^^Ibid., pp. 301-303, and see above, p. 303. 

^Ibid.y pp. 319, 320. 

®^The odd £4,000 of the £206,501 13s. sd. was for expenses of management. 
See above, p. 303. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


867 

eral others which by this act were likewise rendered perpetual, were 
accumulated into one common fund called The Aggregate Fund, 
which was charged, not only with the pa5nnents of the bank an- 
nuity, but with several other annuities and burdens of different 
kinds. This fund was afterwards augmented by the third of George 
1. c. 8. and by the fifth of George L c. 3. and the different duties 
which were then added to it were likewise rendered perpetual.^^ 

In 1717, by the third of George I. c. 7.^^ several other taxes were 
rendered perpetual, and accumulated into another common fund, 
called The General Fund, for the pa5mient of certain annuities, 
amounting in the whole to 724,849^. 6s. io|d. 

In consequence of those different acts, the greater part of the 
taxes which before had been anticipated only for a short term of 
years, were rendered perpetual as a fund for paying, not the capi- 
tal, but the interest only, of the money which had been borrowed 
upon them by different successive anticipations. 

Had money never been raised but by anticipation, the course of 
a few 3/ears would have liberated the public revenue, without any 
other attention of government besides that of not overloading the 
fund by charging it with more debt than it could pay within the 
limited term, and of not anticipating a second time before the ex- 
piration of the first anticipation. But the greater part of European 
governments have been incapable of those attentions. They have 
frequently overloaded the fund even upon the first anticipation; 
and when this happened not to be the case, they have generally 
taken care to overload it, by anticipating a second and a third time 
before the expiration of the first anticipation. The fund becoming 
in this manner altogether insufficient for paying both principal and 
interest of the money borrowed upon it, it became necessary to 
charge it with the interest only, or a perpetual annuity equal to the 
interest, and such unprovident anticipations necessarily gave birth 
to the more ruinous practice of perpetual funding. But though this 
practice necessarily puts off the liberation of the public revenue from 
a fixed period to one so indefinite that it is not very likely ever to 
arrive; yet as a greater sum can in all cases be raised by this new 
practice than by the old one of anticipations, the former, when men 
have once become familiar with it, has in the great exigencies of the 
state been universally preferred to the latter. To relieve the present 
exigency is always the object which principally interests those im- 

“^Ed. 1 reads “payment,” perhaps correctly, 

^ Postlethwayt, History of the Public Revenue, p. 305 
®*This Act belongs to 1716, not 1717. 


Bank and 
East 
India 
Company. 

In 1715 
several 
taxes were 
accumu- 
lated into 
the Ag- 
gregate 
Fund, 

and in 
1717 sev- 
eral 
others 
into the 
General 
Fund, 

Thus 
most of 
the an- 
ticipated 
taxes 
were 

made into 
a fund for 
paying in- 
terest 
only. 

When 
once be- 
come fa- 
miliar, 
perpetual 
funding is 
preferred 
to antici- 
pation. 



A fall in 
the miar- 
ket rate 
of interest 
led to a 
saving, 
which 
gave rise 
to the 
Sinking 
Fund. 


A sinking 
fund faci- 
litates the 
contrac- 
tion of 
new debt. 


Money is 
also bor- 
rowed by 
termin- 
able and 
life an- 
nuities. 

Under 
William 
III. and 


868 the wealth OF NATIONS 

mediately concerned in the administration of public affairs. The 
future liberation of the public revenue, they leave to the care of 
posterity. 

During the reign of queen Anne, the market rate of interest had 
fallen from six to five per cent., and in the twelfth year of her reign 
five per cent, was declared to be the highest rate which could law- 
fully be taken for money borrowed upon private security Soon 
after the greater part of the temporary taxes of Great Britain had 
been rendered perpetual, and distributed into the Aggregate, South 
Sea, and General Funds, the creditors of the public, like those of 
private persons, were induced to accept of five per cent, for the in- 
terest of their money,^® which occasioned a saving of one per cent, 
upon the capital of the greater part of the debts which had been 
thus funded for perpetuity, or of one-sixth of the greater part of 
the annuities which were paid out of the three great funds above 
mentioned. This saving left a considerable surplus in the produce of 
the different taxes which had been accumulated into those funds, 
over and above what was necessary for paying the annuities which 
were now charged upon them, and laid the foundation of what has 
since been called the Sinking Fund. In 1717, it amounted to 323,- 
434^. 75. 7^,^^ In 1727, the interest of the greater part of the 
public debts was still further reduced to four per cent.; and in 
1733 and 1757, to three and a half and three per cent.; which 
reductions still further augmented the sinking fund. 

A sinking fund, though instituted for the payment of old, facili- 
tates very much the contracting of new debts. It is a subsidiary 
fund always at hand to be mortgaged in aid of any other doubtful 
fund, upon which money is proposed to be raised in any exigency 
of the state. Whether the sinking fund of Great Britain has been 
more frequently applied to the one or to the other of those two pur- 
poses, will sufficiently appear by and by. 

Besides those two methods of borrowing, by anticipations and by 
perpetual funding, there are two other methods, which hold a sort 
of middle place between them. These are, that of borrowing upon 
annuities for terms of years, and that of borrowing upon annuities 
for lives. 

During the reigns of king William and queen Anne, large sums 
were frequently borrowed upon annuities for terms of years, which 
were sometimes longer and sometimes shorter. In 1693, 2,ct was 

® Above, pp 88, 89. 

“In 1717, under the provisions of 3 Geo. I., c. 7. Postlethwayt, History 
of the Public Revenue, pp. 120, 145. 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1717. a.d. 1727. 

“This should be 1750. Anderson, Commerce^ a.d. 1749. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 

passed for borrowing one million upon an annuity of fourteen per 
cent.,^^ or of 140,000^. a year, for sixteen years. In 1691, an act 
was passed for borrowing a million upon annuities for lives, upon 
terms which in the present times would appear very advantageous. 
But the subscription was not filled up. In the following year the 
deficiency was made good by borrowing upon annuities for lives at 
fourteen per cent., or at little more than seven years purchase. In 
169s, the persons who had purchased those annuities were allowed 
to exchange them for others of ninety-six years, upon pa3H[ng into 
the Exchequer sixty-three pounds in the hundred; that is, the dif- 
ference between fourteen per cent, for life, and fourteen per cent, 
for ninety-six years, was sold for sixty-three pounds, or for four and 
a half years purchase. Such was the supposed instability of govern- 
ment, that even these terms procured few purchasers. In the reign 
of queen Anne, money was upon different occasions borrowed both 
upon annuities for lives, and upon annuities for terms of thirty-two, 
of eighty-nine, of ninety-eight, and of ninety-nine years. In 1719, 
the proprietors of the annuities for thirty-two years were induced 
to accept in lieu of them South Sea stock to the amount of eleven 
and a half years purchase of the annuities, together with an addi- 
tional quantity of stock equal to the arrears which happened then 
to be due upon them.^^ In 1720, the greater part of the other an- 
nuities for terms of years both long and short were subscribed into 
the same fund. The long annuities at that time amounted to 666,- 
82 iZ. 8 j. 3^. a year.^^ On the 5th of January, 1775, the remain- 
der of them, or what was not subscribed at that time, amounted 
only to 136,453?. 12^. 8^. 

During the two wars which begun in 1739 and in 1755, little 
money was borrowed either upon annuities for terms of years, or 
upon those for lives. An annuity for ninety-eight or ninety-nine 
years, however, is worth nearly as much money as a perpetuity, and 
should, therefore, one might think, be a fund for borrowing nearly 
as much. But those who, in order to make family settlements, and 
to provide for remote futurity, buy into the public stocks, would 
not care to purchase into one of which the value was continually 
diminishing; and such people make a very considerable proportion 
both of the proprietors and purchasers of stock. An annuity for a 
long term of years, therefore, though its intrinsic value may be very 
nearly the same with that of a perpetual annuity, will not find near- 
ly the same number of purchasers. The subscribers to a new loan, 
who mean generally to sell their subscription as soon as possible, 

5 and 6 W. and M., c. 7. 4 W. and M., c. 3. 

Anderson, Commerce, a.d. 1719. ^Ibid., a.d. 1720. 


Anne 

large 

sums were 
borrowed 
on annu- 
ities for 
terms of 
years. 


But little 
money 
was so 
borrowed 
in the 
wars of 
the 

middle of 
the eigh- 
teenth 
century, 
most 
people 
preferring 
a perpet- 
ual an- 
nuity, 



and an- 
nuities for 
terms and 
for lives 
were only 
given as 
pre- 
miums. 

Tontines 
are pre- 
ferred to 
annuities 
on separ- 
ate lives, 
though 
they do 
not liber- 
ate the 
public 
revenue 
so quick- 
ly. 


In France 
a much 
greater 
propor- 
tion of 
the whole 
debt is in 
life annu- 
ities than 
in Eng- 
land, 


S70 the wealth of nations 

prefer greatly a perpetual annuity redeemable by parliament, to an 
irredeemable annuity for a long term of years of only equal amount. 
The value of the former may be supposed always the same, or very 
nearly the same; and it makes, therefore, a more conyenient trans- 
ferable stock than the latter. 

During the two last mentioned wars, annuities, either for terms 
of years or for lives, were seldom granted but as premiums to the 
subscribers to a new loan, over and above the redeemable annuity 
or interest upon the credit of which the loan was supposed to be 
made. They were granted, not as the proper fund upon which the 
money was borrowed; but as an additional encouragement to the 
lender. 

Annuities for lives have occasionally been granted in two dif- 
ferent ways; either upon separate lives, or upon lots of lives, which 
in French are called Tontines, from the name of their inventor. 
When annuities are granted upon separate lives, the death of every 
individual annuitant disburthens the public revenue so far as it was 
affected by his annuity. When annuities are granted upon tontines, 
the liberation of the public revenue does not commence till the 
death of all the annuitants comprehended in one lot, which may 
sometimes consist of twenty or thirty persons, of whom the sur- 
vivors succeed to the annuities of all those who die before them; 
the last survivor succeeding to the annuities of the whole lot. Upon 
the same revenue more money can always be raised by tontines 
than by annuities for separate lives. An annuity, with a right of sur- 
vivorship, is really worth more than an equal annuity for a sepa- 
rate life, and from the confidence which every man naturally has 
in his own good fortune, the principle upon which is founded the 
success of all lotteries, such an annuity generally sells for some- 
thing more than it is worth. In countries where it is usual for gov- 
ernment to raise money by granting annuities, tontines are upon 
this account generally preferred to annuities for separate lives. The 
expedient which will raise most money, is almost always preferred 
to that which is likely to bring about in the speediest manner the 
liberation of the public revenue. 

In France, a much greater proportion of the public debts consists 
in annuities for lives than in England. According to a memoir pre- 
sented by the parliament of Bourdeaux to the king in 1764, the 
whole public debt of France is estimated at twenty-four hundred 
millions of livres; of which the capital for which annuities for lives 
had been granted, is supposed to amount to three hundred millions, 
the eighth part of the whole public debt. The annuities themselves 
are computed to amount to thirty millions a year, the fourth part 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


871 


of one hundred and twenty millions, the supposed interest of that 
whole debt. These estimations, I know very well, are not exact, but 
having been presented by so very respectable a body as approxima- 
tions to the truth, they may, I apprehend, be considered as such. It 
is not the different degrees of anxiety in the two governments of 
France and England for the liberation of the public revenue, which 
occasions this difference in their respective modes of borrowing. It 
arises altogether from the different views and interests of the 
lenders. 

In England, the seat of government being in the greatest mer- thedffer- 
cantile city in the world, the merchants are generally the people 
who advance money to government. By advancing it they do not fact that 
mean to diminish, but, on the contrary, to increase their mercan- in Eng- 
tile capitals; and unless they expected to sell with some profit their 
share in the subscription for a new loan, they never would sub- are mer- 
scribe. But if by advancing their money they were to purchase, in- chants, 
stead of perpetual annuities, annuities for lives only, whether their 
own or those of other people, they would not always be so likely to 
sell them with a profit. Annuities upon their own lives they would 
always sell with loss; because no man will give for an annuity upon 
the life of another, whose age and state of health are nearly the 
same with his own, the same price which he would give for one up- 
on his own. An annuity upon the life of a third person, indeed, is, 
no doubt, of equal value to the buyer and the seller; but its real 
value begins to diminish from the moment it is granted, and con- 
tinues to do so more and more as long as it subsists. It can never, 
therefore, make so convenient a transferable stock as a perpetual 
annuity, of which the real value may be supposed always the same, 
or very nearly the same. 

In France the seat of government not being in a great mercantile whereas 
city, merchants do not make so great a proportion of the people France 
who advance money to government. The people concerned in the person^ 
finances, the farmers general, the receivers of the taxes which are engaged 
not in farm, the court bankers, &c. make the greater part of those 
who advanced their money in all public exigencies. Such people are 
commonly men of mean birth, but of great wealth, and frequently lection of 
of great pride. They are too proud to marry their equals, and wo- 
men of quality disdain to marry them. They frequently resolve, chiefly 
therefore, to live bachelors, and having neither any families of their bachelors, 
own, nor much regard for those of their relations, whom they are 
not always very fond of acknowledging, they desire only to live in 
splendour during their own time, and are not unwilling that their 
fortune should end with themselves. The number of rich people, be- 



The sys- 
tem of 
perpetual 
funding 
prevents 
the people 
from feel- 
ing dis- 
tinctly the 
burden of 
war. 


Their 
burdens 
are not 
reduced 
on the 
conclu- 
sion of 
peace. 


S72 the wealth of nations 

sides, who are either averse to marry, or whose condition of life ren- 
ders it either improper or inconvenient for them to do so, is much 
greater in France than in England. To such people, who have little 
or no care for posterity, nothing can be more convenient than to 
exchange their capital for a revenue, which is to last just as long,®^ 
and no longer than they wish it to do. 

The ordinary expence of the greater part of modern governments 
in time of peace being equal or nearly equal to their ordinary rev- 
enue, when war comes, they are both unwilling and unable to in- 
crease their revenue in proportion to the increase of their expence. 
They are unwilling, for fear of offending the people, who by so 
great and so sudden an increase of taxes, would soon be disgusted 
with the war; and they are unable, from not well knowing what 
taxes would be sufficient to produce the revenue wanted. The facil- 
ity of borrowing delivers them from the embarrassment which this 
fear and inability would otherwise occasion. By means of borrow- 
ing they are enabled, with a very moderate increase of taxes, to 
raise, from year to year, money sufficient for carrying on the war, 
and by the practice of perpetual funding they are enabled, with the 
smallest possible increase of taxes, to raise annually the largest pos- 
sible sum of money. In great empires the people who live in the 
capital, and in the provinces remote from the scene of action, feel, 
many of them, scarce any inconveniency from the war; but enjoy, 
at their ease, the amusement of reading in the newspapers the ex- 
ploits of their own fleets and armies. To them this amusement com- 
pensates the small difference between the taxes which they pay on 
account of the war, and those which they had been accustomed to 
pay in time of peace. They are commonly dissatisfied with the re- 
turn of peace, which puts an end to their amusement, and to a thou- 
sand visionary hopes of conquest and national glory, from a longer 
continuance of the war. 

The return of peace, indeed, seldom relieves them from the great- 
er part of the taxes imposed during the war. These are mortgaged 
for the interest of the debt contracted in order to carry it on. If, 
over and above paying the interest of this debt, and defraying the 
ordinary expence of government, the old revenue, together with the 
new taxes, produce some surplus revenue, it may perhaps be con- 
verted into a sinking fund for paying off the debt. But, in the first 
place, this sinking fund, even supposing it should be applied to no 
other purpose, is generally altogether inadequate for paying, in the 
course of any period during which it can reasonably be expected 
that peace should continue, the whole debt contracted during the 
Ed. I reads “just as long as.’’ 



^73 


PUBLIC DEBTS 

war; and, in the second place, this fund is almost always applied 
to other purposes. 

The new taxes were imposed for the sole purpose of paying the 
interest of the money borrowed upon them. If they produce more, 
it is generally something which was neither intended nor expected, 
and is therefore seldom very considerable. Sinking funds have gen- 
erally arisen, not so much from any surplus of the taxes which was 
over and above what was necessary for paying the interest or an- 
nuity originally charged upon them, as from a subsequent reduc- 
tion of that interest. That of Holland in 1655, and that of the ec- 
clesiastical state in 1685, were both formed in this manner.®^ Hence 
the usual insufficiency of such funds. 

During the most profound peace, various events occur which re- 
quire an extraordinary expence, and government finds it always 
more convenient to defray this expence by misapplying the sinking 
fund than by imposing a new tax. Every new tax is immediately 
felt more or less by the people. It occasions always some murmur, 
and meets with some opposition. The more taxes may have been 
multiplied, the higher they may have been raised upon every dif- 
ferent subject of taxation; the more loudly the people complain of 
every new tax, the more difficult it becomes too either to find out 
new subjects of taxation, or to raise much higher the taxes already 
imposed upon the old. A momentary suspension of the payment of 
debt is not immediately felt by the people, and occasions neither 
murmur nor complaint. To borrow of the sinking fund is always an 
obvious and easy expedient for getting out of the present difficulty. 
The more the public debts may have been accumulated, the more 
necessary it may have become to study to reduce them, the more 
dangerous, the more ruinous it may be to misapply any part of the 
sinking fund; the less likely is the public debt to be reduced to any 
considerable degree, the more likely, the more certainly is the sink- 
ing fund to be misapplied towards defraying all the extraordinary 
expences which occur in time of peace. When a nation is already 
overburdened with taxes, nothing but the necessities of a new war, 
nothing but either the animosity of national vengeance, or the anx- 
iety for national security, can induce the people to submit, with 
tolerable patience, to a new tax. Hence the usual misapplication of 
the sinking fund. 

In Great Britain, from the time that we had first recourse to the 
ruinous expedient of perpetual funding, the reduction of the public 
debt in time of peace, has never borne any proportion to its ac- 

“ Anderson, Commerce^ mentions these reductions under their dates, and 
recalls them in reference to the British reduction in 1717. 


Any new 
taxes im- 
posed are 
larely 
sufficient 
to do 

more than 
pay the 
new in- 
terest. 
Sinking 
funds 
arise gen- 
erally 
from re- 
ductions 
of inter- 
est, 

and are 
constant- 
ly mis- 
applied. 


The Brit- 
ish debt 
had its 
origin in 



the war of 
1688-97, 


which left 
a debt of 
twenty- 
one and a 
half mil- 
lions. 

This was 
reduced 
by five 
millions 
in 1697- 
1701. 
From 
1702 to 
1722 the 
increase 
was 
thirty- 
nine mil- 
lions, and 
from 1723 
to 1739 
the re- 
duction 
was only 
eight and 
one-third 
millions. 
From 
1739 to 
1748 the 
increase 
was 
thirty- 
one and 
one-third 
millions. 

During 
the peace 
of 1748- 
SS the re- 
duction 
was six 
millions, 
and the 
seven 


874 the wealth of nations 

cumulation in time of war. It was in the war which began in 1688, 
and was concluded by the treaty of Ryswick in 1697, that the foun- 
dation of the present enormous debt of Great Britain was first laid. 

On the 3 ist of December 1697, the public debts of Great Britain, 
funded and unfunded, amounted to 21,515,742^. 135. A 
great part of those debts had been contracted upon short anticipa- 
tions, and some part upon annuities for lives; so that before the 
31st of December 1701, in less than four years, there had partly 
been paid off, and partly reverted to the public, the sum of 5,121,- 
041^. I2S. ofd.; a greater reduction of the public debt than has 
ever since been brought about in so short a period of time. The re- 
maining debt, therefore, amounted only to 16,394,701^. is. 7}d. 

In the war which began in 1702, and which was concluded by 
the treaty of Utrecht, the public debts were still more accumulated. 
On the 31st of December 1714, they amounted to 53,681,076/. ss. 
6-^d. The subscription into the South Sea fund of the short 
and long annuities increased the capital of the public debts, so 
that on the 31st of December 1722, it amounted to 55,282,978/. 
IS. The reduction of the debt began in 1723, and went on 
so slowly that, on the 31st of December 1739, during seventeen 
years of profound peace, the whole sum paid off was no more than 
8,328,354/. 17s. ii-^d. the capital of the public debt at that 
time amounting to 46,954,623/. $s. 4^d. 

The Spanish war, which began in 1739, and the French war 
which soon followed it, occasioned a further increase of the debt, 
which, on the 31st of December 1748, after the war had been con- 
cluded by the treaty of Aix la Chapelle, amounted to 78,293,313/. 
15 . lofd. The most profound peace of seventeen years continu- 
ance had taken no more than 8,328,354/. 175. ii-^d. from it. 
A war of less than nine years continuance added 31,338,689/. 185. 
6^. to it.^'^ 

During the administration of Mr. Pelham, the interest of the pub- 
lic debt was reduced, or at least measures were taken for reducing 
it, from four to three per cent.; the sinking fund was increased, 
and some part of the public debt was paid off. In 1755, before the 
breaking out of the late war, the funded debt of Great Britain 
amounted to 72,289,673/.^^ On the 5th of January 1763, at the 
conclusion of the peace, the funded debt amounted to 122,603,- 

Ed. I reads “long and short.” 

®^See James Postlethwayfs history of the public revenue. Pp. 42, 143- 
145, 147, 224, 300. The reference covers the three paragraphs in the text 
above. 

Above, p. 868. 

® Present State of the Nation (above, p. 411), p. 28. 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^75 

336/. 8^. The unfunded debt has been stated at 13,927,589/. years’ war 
2^. 2d, But the expence occasioned by the war did not end with 
the conclusion of the peace; so that though, on the 5th of Janu- seventy- 
ary 1764, the funded debt was increased (partly by a new loan, five, 
and partly by funding a part of the unfunded debt) to 129,586,- 
789/. 10^. there still remained (according to the very well 
informed author of the Considerations on the trade and finances of 
Great Britain) an unfunded debt which was brought to account 
in that and the following year, of 9,975,017/. 12^. 2^d, In 1764, 
therefore, the public debt of Great Britain, funded and unfunded 
together, amounted, according to this author, to 139,561,807/. 2^. 

4^.^^ The annuities for lives too, which had been granted as pre- 
miums to the subscribers to the new loans in 1757, estimated at 
fourteen years purchase, were valued at 472,500/.; and the annui- 
ties for long terms of years, granted as premiums likewise, in 1761 
and 1762, estimated at 27^ years purchase, were valued at 6,826,- 
875/.^® During a peace of about seven years continuance, the pru- 
dent and truly patriot administration of Mr. Pelham, was not able 
to pay off an old debt of six millions. During a war of nearly the 
same continuance, a new debt of more than seventy-five millions 
was contracted. 

On the sth of January 1775, the funded debt of Great Britain In the 
amounted to 124,996,086/. i^. 6^d. The unfunded, exclusive of a 
large civil list debt, to 4,150,236/. 35. iiftf. Both together, to 129,- peace be- 

146,322/. 5^. td. According to this account the whole debt paid off fore 

during eleven years profound peace amounted only to 10,415,474/. 
i6j. 9jd. Even this small reduction of debt, however, has not been reduction 
all made from the savings out of the ordinary revenue of the state. 

Several extraneous sums, altogether independent of that ordinary 
revenue, have contributed towards it. Amongst these we may lions, and 
reckon an additional shilling in the pound land tax for three years; 
the two millions received from the East India company, as indem- due to 

Anderson, CommercBj postscript ad init. 

the expenses of the war did not cease with its operations.”— 
siderations (see a few lines below), p. 4. 
p. 5. 

The account is given in the Continuation of Anderson’s Commerce, a.t>. 

1764, vol. iv., p. 58, in ed. of 1801. The ‘‘Jd.” should be “Jd ” 

Considerations on the Trade and Finances of this Kingdom and on the 
measures of administration with respect to those great national objects since 
the conclusion of the peace, by Thomas Whately, 1766 (often ascribed to 
George Grenville), p. 22. 

““This is the amount obtained by adding the two items mentioned, and 
is the reading of ed. i. Eds. 2-5 all read “ii39,5i6,8o7 2s. 4d.,” which is 
doubtless a misprint. The total is not given in Considerations, 

Considerations, p. 4. Ed. i reads “Among.” 



reduc- 
tions of 
interest. 


S76 the wealth oe nations 

nification for their territorial acquisitions; and the one hundred and 
ten thousand pounds received from the bank for the renewal of 
their charter. To these must be added several other sums which, as 
they arose out of the late war, ought perhaps to be considered as 
deductions from the expences of it. The principal are, 


The produce of French prizes 

Composition for French prisoners .... 
What has been received from the sale of the ceded 1 
islands J 


/. j. 

690,449 18 
670,000 0 

9S,Soo 0 


d, 

9 

0 

0 


Total, 1 , 455,949 18 9 


If we add to this sum the balance of the earl of Chatham’s and Mr. 
Calcraft’s accounts, and other army savings of the same kind, to- 
gether with what has been received from the bank, the East India 
company, and the additional shilling in the pound land tax; the 
whole must be a good deal more than five millions. The debt, there- 
fore, which since the peace has been paid out of the savings from 
the ordinary revenue of the state, has not, one year with another, 
amounted to half a million a year. The sinking fund has, no doubt, 
been considerably augmented since the peace, by the debt which 
has been paid off, by the reduction of the redeemable four per cents, 
to three per cents., and by the annuities for lives which have fallen 
in, and, if peace were to continue, a million, perhaps, might now 
be annually spared out of it towards the discharge of the debt. An- 
other million, accordingly, was paid in the course of last year; but, 
at the same time, a large civil list debt was left unpaid, and we are 
now involved in a new war which, in its progress, may prove as ex- 
pensive as any of our former wars.^^ The new debt which will prob- 
ably be contracted before the end of the next campaign, may per- 
haps be nearly equal to all the old debt which has been paid off 
from the savings out of the ordinary revenue of the state. It would 
be altogether chimerical, therefore, to expect that the public debt 
should ever be completely discharged by any savings which are 
likely to be made from that ordinary revenue as it stands at present. 

Above, p. 54S, note 43. Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 

“It has proved more expensive than any of our former wars; and has in- 
volved us in an additional debt of more than one hundred millions. During 
a profound peace of eleven years, little more than ten millions of debt was 
paid; during a war of seven years, more than one hundred millions was 
contracted. This note appears first in ed. 3 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


877 

The public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe, Theopin- 
particularly those of England, have by one author been represented 
as the accumulation of a great capital superadded to the other cap- tional 
ital of the country, by means of which its trade is extended, its debt is an 

manufactures multiplied, and its lands cultivated and improved capitalis^ 

much beyond what they could have been by means of that other altogether 
capital only.®^ He does not consider that the capital which the first erroneous, 
creditors of the public advanced to government, was, from the mo- 
ment in which they advanced it, a certain portion of the annual 
produce turned away from serving in the function of a capital, to 
serve in that of a revenue; from maintaining productive labourers 
to maintain unproductive ones, and to be spent and wasted, gen- 
erally in the course of the year, without even the hope of any fu- 
ture reproduction. In return for the capital which they advanced 
they obtained, indeed, an annuity in the public funds in most cases 
of more than equal value. This annuity, no doubt, replaced to them 
their capital, and enabled them to carry on their trade and business 
to the same or pethaps to a greater extent than before; that is, they 
were enabled either to borrow of other people a new capital upon 
the credit of this annuity, or by selling it to get from other people a 
new capital of their own, equal or superior to that which they had 
advanced to government. This new capital, however, which they in 
this manner either bought or borrowed of other people, must have 
existed in the country before, and must have been employed as all 
capitals are, in maintaining productive labour. When it came into 
the hands of those who had advanced their money to government, 
though it was in some respects a new capital to them, it was not so 
to the country; but was only a capital withdrawn from certain em- 
ployments in order to be turned towards others. Though it re- 
placed to them what they had advanced to government, it did not 
replace it to the country. Had they not advanced this capital to 
government, there would have been in the country two capitals, 
two portions of the annual produce, instead of one, employed in 
maintaining productive labour. 

When for defraying the expence of government a revenue is When 
raised within the year from the produce of free or unmortgaged iiecessary 
taxes, a certain portion of the revenue of private people is only ' 

turned away from maintaining one species of unproductive labour, met by 

“Garnier’s note, Recherches etc,, tom. iv., p. 501, is “Pinto: Traiti de la 
Circulation et du Cridit,^’ a work published in 1771 (“Amsterdam”), “par 
Tauteur de Tessai sur le luxe,” of which sec esp. pp. 44, 45, 209-2 ii. But an 
English essay of 1731 to the same effect is quoted by Melon, Essai Politique 
sur le Commerce, chap, xxiii., ed. of 1761, p. 296, and Melon seems to be 
referred to below, p. 879. Cp. Lectures, p. 210, 



taxes, it 
only di- 
verts un- 
produc- 
tive 
labour 
from one 
unpro- 
ductive 
employ- 
ment to 
another. 

When it is 
met by 
borrow- 
ing, it di- 
verts 
labour 
from pro- 
ductive 
to unpro- 
ductive 
employ- 
ment, and 
the only 
advantage 
is that 
people 
can con- 
tinue to 
save more 
during 
the war, 

which ad- 
vantage 
disap- 
pears im- 
mediately 
peace is 
conclud- 
ed. 

Under the 
other 
system, 
too, wars 
would be 
shorter 
and peri- 
ods of 
peace 
longer. 


878 the wealth of nations 

towards maintaining another. Some part of what they pay in those 
taxes might no doubt have been accumulated into capital, and con- 
sequently employed in maintaining productive labour; but the 
greater part would probably have been spent and consequently em- 
ployed in maintaining unproductive labour. The public expence, 
however, when defrayed in this manner, no doubt hinders more or 
less the further accumulation of new capital; but it does not neces- 
sarily occasion the destruction of any actually existing capital. 

When the public expence is defrayed by funding, it is defrayed 
by the annual destruction of some capital which had before existed 
in the country; by the perversion of some portion of the annual 
produce which had before been destined for the maintenance of 
productive labour, towards that of unproductive labour. As in this 
case, however, the taxes are lighter than they would have been, had 
a revenue sufficient for defraying the same expence been raised 
within the year; the private revenue of individuals is necessarily 
less burdened, and consequently their ability to save and accumu- 
late some part of that revenue into capital is a good deal less im- 
paired. If the method of funding destroy more old capital, it at 
the same time hinders less the accumulation or acquisition of new 
capital, than that of defra3dng the public expence by a revenue 
raised within the year. Under the system of funding, the frugality 
and industry of private people can more easily repair the breaches 
which the waste and extravagance of government may occasionally 
make in the general capital of the society. 

It is only during the continuance of war, however, that the sys- 
tem of funding has this advantage over the other system. Were the 
expence of war to be defrayed always by a revenue raised within 
the year, the taxes from which that extraordinary revenue was 
drawn would last no longer than the year. The ability of private 
people to accumulate, though less during the war, would have been 
greater during the peace than under the system of funding. War 
would not necessarily have occasioned the destruction of any old 
capitals, and peace would have occasioned the accumulation of 
many more new. Wars would in general be more speedily con- 
cluded, and less wantonly undertaken. The people feeling, during 
the continuance of the war, the complete burden of it, would soon 
grow weary of it, and government, in order to humour them, would 
not be under the necessity of carrying it on longer than it was 
necessary to do so. The foresight of the heavy and unavoidable 
burdens of war would hinder the people from wantonly calling for 
it when there was no real or solid interest to fight for. The seasons 

Eds. 1-3 read the, indicative, “destroys.” 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^79 

during which the ability of private people to accumulate was some- 
what impaired, would occur more rarely, and be of shorter continu- 
ance. Those on the contrary, during which that ability was in the 
highest vigour, would be of much longer duration than they can 
well be under the system of funding. 

When funding, besides, has made a certain progress, the multi- 
plication of taxes which it brings along with it sometimes impairs 
as much the ability of private people to accumulate even in time of 
peace, as the other system would in time of war. The peace revenue 
of Great Britain amounts at present to more than ten millions a 
year. If free and unmortgaged it might be sufficient, with proper 
management and without contracting a shilling of new debt, to 
carry on the most vigorous war. The private revenue of the inhab- 
itants of Great Britain is at present as much encumbered in time of 
peace, their ability to accumulate is as much impaired as it would 
have been in the time of the most expensive war, had the pernicious 
system of funding never been adopted. 

In the pa3nnent of the interest of the public debt, it has been 
said, it is the right hand which pays the left.®^ The money does not 
go out of the country. It is only a part of the revenue of one set of 
the inhabitants which is transferred to another; and the nation is 
not a farthing the poorer. This apology is founded altogether in the 
sophistry of the mercantile system, and after the long examination 
which I have already bestowed upon that system, it may perhaps 
be unnecessary to say any thing further about it. It supposes, be- 
sides, that the whole public debt is owing to the inhabitants of the 
country, which happens not to be true; the Dutch, as well as sev- 
eral other foreign nations, having a very considerable share in our 
public funds. But though the whole debt were owing to the inhab- 
itants of the country, it would not upon that account be less per- 
nicious. 

Land and capital stock are the two original sources of all revenue 
both private and public. Capital stock pays the wages of produc- 
tive labour, whether employed in agriculture, manufactures, or 
commerce. The management of those two original sources of rev- 
enue belongs to two different sets of people; the proprietors of land, 
and the owners or employers of capital stock. 

The proprietor of land is interested for the sake of his own rev- 
enue to keep his estate in as good condition as he can, by building 

Misprinted “it” in ed. 5. 

“ “Les Dcttes d’un fitat sent des dettes de la main droite a la main gauche, 
dont le corps ne se trouvera point affaibli, s’il a la quantite d’aliments n6ces- 
saires, et s’il sait les distribuer.”— Melon, Essai politique sur le Commerce, 
chap, xxiii., ed. of 1761, p. 296. 


Moreover 
funding 
at length 
burdens 
the reve- 
nue so 
greatly 
that the 
ordinary 
peace ex- 
penditure 
exceeds 
that 
which 
would 
under the 
other sys- 
tem have 
been suf- 
ficient in 
war. 

The fact 
of part or 
the whole 
of the 
debt be- 
ing held 
at home 
makes no 
difference 


Land and 
capital, 
the two 
original 
sources of 
all reve- 
nue, are 
managed 
by land- 
lords and 
owners ol 
capital. 



Taxation 
may di- 
minish or 
destroy 
the land- 
lord’s 
ability to 
improve 
his land, 


and in- 
duce the 
owner of 
capital to 
remove it 
from the 
country. 


The 

transfer- 
ence of 
the 

sources of 
revenue 
from the 
owners of 
particu- 
lar por- 
tions of 
them to 
the cred- 
itors of 
the public 
must oc- 
casion 
neglect of 
land and 
waste or 
removal 
of capital. 


880 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS' 

and repairing his tenants' houses, by making and maintaining the 
necessary drains and enclosures, and all those other expensive im- 
provements which it properly belongs to the landlord to make and 
maintain. But by different land-taxes the revenue of the landlord 
may be so much diminished; and by different duties upon the 
necessaries and conveniences of life, that diminished revenue may 
be rendered of so little real value, that he may find himself alto- 
gether unable to make or maintain those expensive improvements. 
When the landlord, however, ceases to do his part, it is altogether 
impossible that the tenant should continue to do his. As the distress 
of the landlord increases, the agriculture of the country must 
necessarily decline. 

When, by different taxes upon the necessaries and conveniences 
of life, the owners and employers of capital stock find, that what- 
ever revenue they derive from it, will not, in a particular country, 
purchase the same quantity of those necessaries and conveniences 
which an equal revenue would in almost any other, they will be 
disposed to remove to some other. And when, in order to raise those 
taxes, all or the greater part of merchants and manufacturers, that 
is, all or the greater part of the employers of great capitals, come to 
be continually exposed to the mortifying and vexatious visits of the 
tax-gatherers, this disposition to remove will soon be changed into 
an actual removal. The industry of the country will necessarily fall 
with the removal of the capital which supported it, and the ruin of 
trade and manufactures will follow the declension of agriculture. 

To transfer from the owners of those two great sources of rev- 
enue, land and capital stock, from the persons immediately in- 
terested in the good condition of every particular portion of land, 
and in the good management of every particular portion of capital 
stock, to another set of persons (the creditors of the public, who 
have no such particular interest), the greater part of the revenue 
arising from either, must, in the long-run, occasion both the neg- 
lect of land, and the waste or removal of capital stock. A creditor 
of the public has no doubt a general interest in the prosperity of the 
agriculture, manufactures, and commerce of the country; and con- 
sequently in the good condition of its lands, and in the good man- 
agement of its capital stock. Should there be any general failure or 
declension in any of these things, the produce of the different taxes 
might no longer be sufficient to pay him the annuity or interest 
which is due to him. But a creditor of the public, considered merely 
as such, has no interest in the good condition of any particular por- 
tion of land, or in the good management of any particular portion 
of capital stock. As a creditor of the public he has no knowledge of 



88i 


PUBLIC DEBTS 

any such particular portion. He has no inspection of it. He can 
have no care about it. Its ruin may in some cases be unknown to 
him, and cannot directly affect him. 

The practice of funding has gradually enfeebled every state Theprac- 
which has adopted it. The Italian republics seem to have begun it. 

Genoa and Venice, the only two remaining which can pretend to an has al- 
independent existence, have both been enfeebled by it. Spain seems ways en- 
to have learned the practice from the Italian republics, and (its gtatel^ 
taxes being probably less judicious than theirs) it has, in propor- 
tion to its natural strength, been still more enfeebled. The debts of 
Spain are of very old standing. It was deeply in debt before the end 
of the sixteenth century, about a hundred years before England 
owed a shilling. France, notwithstanding all its natural resources, 
languishes under an oppressive load of the same kind. The republic 
of the United Provinces is as much enfeebled by its debts as either 
Genoa or Venice. Is it likely that in Great Britain alone a practice, 
which has brought either weakness or desolation into every other 
country, should prove altogether innocent? 

The system of taxation established in those different countries, The su- 
it may be said, is inferior to that of England. I believe it is so. But 
it ought to be remembered, that when the wisest government has British 
exhausted all the proper subjects of taxation, it must, in cases of system of 
urgent necessity, have recourse to improper ones.^® The wise re- 
public of Holland has upon some occasions been obliged to have re- enable 

course to taxes as inconvenient as the greater part of those of Spain. Britain to 

Another war begun before any considerable liberation of the public 
revenue had been brought about, and growing in its progress as ex- limited 
pensive as the last war, may, from irresistible necessity, render the burden. 
British system of taxation as oppressive as that of Holland, or even 
as that of Spain. To the honour of our present system of taxation, 
indeed, it has hitherto given so little embarrassment to industry, 
that, during the course even of the most expensive wars, the frug- 
ality and good conduct of individuals seem to have been able, by 
saving and accumulation, to repair all the breaches which the waste 
and extravagance of government had made in the general capital of 
the society. At the conclusion of the late war, the most expensive 
that Great Britain ever waged, her agriculture was as flourishing, 
her manufacturers as numerous and as fully employed, and her 
commerce as extensive, as they had ever been before. The capital, 
therefore, which supported all those different branches of industry, 
must have been equal to what it had ever been before. Since the 
peace, agriculture has been still further improved, the rents of 

‘^Ed. I reads “most.” Above, p. 667. 


®^Eds. I and 2 read “seems.’ 



882 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Bank- 
ruptcy is 
always 
the end of 
great ac- 
cumula- 
tion of 
debt. 

Raising 
the coin 
has been 
the usual 
method of 
disguising 
bank- 
ruptcy 
though 
this ex- 
pedient 
has much 
worse 
conse- 
quences 
than open 
bank- 
ruptcy. 


houses have risen in every town and village of the country, a proof 
of the increasing wealth and revenue of the people; and the annual 
amount of the greater part of the old taxes, of the principal 
branches of the excise and customs in particular, has been continu- 
ally increasing, an equally clear proojf of an increasing consump- 
tion, and consequently of an increasing produce, which could alone 
support that consumption. Great Britain seems to support with 
ease, a burden which, half a century ago, nobody believed her cap- 
able of supporting. Let us not, however, upon this account rashly 
conclude that she is capable of supporting any burden; nor even be 
too confident that she could support, without great distress, a bur- 
den a little greater* than what has already been laid upon her. 

When national debts have once been accumulated to a certain 
degree, there is scarce, I believe, a single instance of their having 
been fairly and completely paid. The liberation of the public rev- 
enue, if it has ever been brought about at all, has always been 
brought about by a bankruptcy; sometimes by an avowed one, but 
always by a real one, though frequently by a pretended payment.®^ 

The raising of the denomination of the coin has been the most 
usual expedient by which a real public bankruptcy has been dis- 
guised under the appearance of a pretended payment. If a six- 
pence, for example, should either by act of parliament or royal 
proclamation be raised to the denomination of a shilling, and 
twenty sixpences to that of a pound sterling; the person who under 
the old denomination had borrowed twenty shillings, or near four 
ounces of silver, would, under the new, pay with twenty sixpences, 
or with something less than two ounces. A national debt of about a 
hundred and twenty-eight millions, nearly the capital of the funded 
and unfunded debt of Great Britain, might in this manner be paid 
with about sixty-four millions of our present money. It would in- 
deed be a pretended payment only, and the creditors of the public 
would really be defrauded of ten shillings in the pound of what was 
due to them. The calamity too would extend much further than to 
the creditors of the public, and those of every private person would 
suffer a proportionable loss; and this without any advantage, but 
in most cases with a great additional loss, to the creditors of the 
public. If the creditors of the public indeed were generally much 
in debt to other people, they might in some measure compensate 
their loss by paying their creditors in the same coin in which *the 

“Raynal says “L’evidence autorise seulement a dire que les gouverne- 
ments qui pour le malheur des peuples out adopte le detestable systeme des 
emprunts doivent t6t ou tard Tabjurer: et que Pabus qu’ils en ont fait les 
torcera vraisemblablement a etre infideles philosophigue, Am- 

sterdam, 1773, tom. iv., p. 274. 



PUBLIC DEBTS S83 

public had paid them. But in most countries the creditors of the 
public are, the greater part of them, wealthy people, who stand 
more in the relation of creditors than in that of debtors towards 
the rest of their fellow-citizens. A pretended payment of this kind, 
therefore, instead of alleviating, aggravates in most cases the loss of 
the creditors of the public; and without any advantage to the pub- 
lic, extends the calamity to a great number of other innocent peo- 
ple. It occasions a general and most pernicious subversion of the 
fortunes of private people; enriching in most cases the idle and 
profuse debtor at the expence of the industrious and frugal creditor, 
and transporting a great part of the national capital from the 
hands which were likely to increase and improve it, to those which 
are likely to dissipate and destroy it. When it becomes necessary 
for a state to declare itself bankrupt, in the same manner as when 
it becomes necessary for an individual to do so, a fair, open, and 
avowed bankruptcy is always the measure which is both least dis- 
honourable to the debtor, and least hurtful to the creditor. The 
honour of a state is surely very poorly provided for, when, in order 
to cover the disgrace of a real bankruptcy, it has recourse to a jug- 
gling trick of this kind, so easily seen through, and at the same 
time so extremely pernicious. 

Almost all states, however, ancient as well as modern, when re- It has 
duced to this necessity, have, upon some occasions, played this very 
juggling trick. The Romans, at the end of the first Punic war, re- many 
duced the As, the coin or denomination by which they computed states, in- 

the value of all their other coins, from containing twelve ounces of and^t 
copper to contain only two ounces: that is, they raised two ounces Rome, 
of copper to a denomination which had always before expressed the 
value of twelve ounces. The republic was, in this manner, enabled 
to pay the great debts which it had contracted with the sixth part 
of what it really owed. So sudden and so great a bankruptcy, we 
should in the present times be apt to imagine, must have occasioned 
a very violent popular clamour. It does not appear to have occa- 
sioned any. The law which enacted it was, like all other laws relat- 
ing to the coin, introduced and carried through the assembly of the 
people by a tribune, and was probably a very popular law. In 
Rome, as in all the other ancient republics, the poor people were 
constantly in debt to the rich and the great, who, in order to secure 
their votes at the annual elections, used to lend them money at ex- 
orbitant interest, which, being never paid, soon accumulated into a 
sum too great either for the debtor to pay, or for any body else to 
pay for him. The debtor, for fear of a very severe execution, was 
obliged, without any further gratuity, to vote for the candidate 



884 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


and has 
led to the 
universal 
reduction 
of the 
value of 
the coin. 


whom the creditor recommended. In spite of all the laws against 
bribery and corruption, the bounty of the candidates, together with 
the occasional distributions of corn, which were ordered by the sen- 
ate, were the principal funds from which, during the latter times 
of the Roman republic, the poorer citizens derived their subsistence. 
To deliver themselves from this subjection to their creditors, the 
poorer citizens were continually calling out either for an entire ab- 
olition of debts, or for what they called New Tables; that is, for a 
law which should entitle them to a complete acquittance, upon pay- 
ing only a certain proportion of their accumulated debts. The law 
which reduced the coin of all denominations to a sixth part of its 
former value, as it enabled them to pay their debts with a sixth part 
of what they really owed, was equivalent to the most advantageous 
new tables. In order to satisfy the people, the rich and the great 
were, upon several different occasions, obliged to consent to laws 
both for abolishing debts, and for introducing new tables; and they 
probably were induced to consent to this law, partly for the same 
reason, and partly that, by liberating the public revenue, they 
might restore vigour to that government of which they themselves 
had the principal direction. An operation of this kind would at 
once reduce a debt of a hundred and twenty-eight millions to 
twenty-one millions three hundred and thirty-three thousand three 
hundred and thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight-pence. In 
the course of the second Punic war the As was still further reduced, 
first, from two ounces of copper to one ounce; and afterwards from 
one ounce to half an ounce; that is, to the twenty-fourth part of 
its original value.®^ By combining the three Roman operations into 
one, a debt of a hundred and twenty-eight millions of our present 
money, might in this manner be reduced all at once to a debt of five 
millions three hundred and thirty-three thousand three hundred 
and thirty-three pounds six shillings and eight-pence. Even the 
enormous debt of Great Britain might in this manner soon be paid. 

By means of such expedients the coin of, I believe, all nations 
has been gradually reduced more and more below its original value, 
and the same nominal sum has been gradually brought to contain a 
smaller and a smaller quantity of silver. 

Nations have sometimes, for the same purpose, adulterated the 
standard of their coin ; that is, have mixed a greater quantity of al- 
loy in it. If in the pound weight of our silver coin, for example, in- 


Eds. I and 2 read “later”; cp. above, p. 831. 

This chapter of Roman history is based on a few sentences in Pliny, 
H,N., lih. xxxiii., cap. iii. Modem criticism has discovered the facts to be 
not nearly so simple as they are represented in the text. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


885 

stead of eighteen penny-weight, according to the present standard, 
there was mixed eight ounces of alloy; a pound sterling, or twenty 
shillings of such coin, would be worth little more than six shillings 
and eight-pence of our present money. The quantity of silver con- 
tained in six shillings and eight-pence of our present money, would 
thus be raised very nearly to the denomination of a pound sterling. 
The adulteration of the standard has exactly the same effect with 
what the French call an augmentation, or a direct raising of the de- 
nomination of the coin. 

An augmentation, or a direct raising of the denomination of the 
coin, always is, and from its nature must be, an open and avowed 
operation. By means of it pieces of a smaller weight and bulk are 
called by the same name which had before been given to pieces of a 
greater weight and bulk. The adulteration of the standard, on the 
contrary, has generally been a concealed operation. By means of it 
pieces were issued from the mint of the same denominations, and, 
as nearly as could be contrived, of the same weight, bulk, and ap- 
pearance, with pieces which had been current before of much 
greater value. When king John of France/^ in order to pay his 
debts, adulterated his coin, all the officers of his mint were sworn 
to secrecy. Both operations are unjust. But a simple augmentation 
is an injustice of open violence; whereas an adulteration is an in- 
justice of treacherous fraud. This latter operation, therefore, as 
soon as it has been discovered, and it could never be concealed very 
long, has always excited much greater indignation than the former. 
The coin after any considerable augmentation has very seldom 
been brought back to its former weight; but after the greatest 
adulterations it has almost always been brought back to its former 
fineness. It has scarce ever happened that the fury and indignation 
of the people could otherwise be appeased. 

In the end of the reign of Henry VIII. and in the beginning of 
that of Edward VI. the English coin was not only raised in its de- 
nomination, but adulterated in its standard. The like frauds were 
practised in Scotland during the minority of James VI. They have 
occasionally been practised in most other countries. 

That the public revenue of Great Britain can ever be com- 
pletely liberated, or even that any considerable progress can ever 


Another 
expedient 
is to 

adulterate 
the coin, 


but this is 
a treach- 
erous 
fraud 
which oc- 
casions 
such in- 
dignation 
that it 
usually 
fails. 


It has 
been tried 
in Eng- 
land, 
Scotland 
and most 
other 
countries. 


®^See du Cange Glossary, voce Moneta; the Benedictine edition. This gives 
a taWe of the alterations made in the coin and refers to Le Blanc, Trdti 
historique des Monnoyes de France, 1792, in which the fact that the officers 
were adjured by their oaths to keep the matter secret is mentioned on p. 
218, but the adjuration is also quoted in the more accessible Melon, Essai 
politique sur le Commerce, chap, xiii., ed. of 1761, p. 177. 

® Misprinted “never” in eds. 2-5. 



886 


For the 
paying 
off or re- 
duction 
of the 
British 
debt a 
very con- 
siderable 
increase* 
of reve- 
nue or 
diminu- 
tion of 
expense is 
necessary. 

Altera- 
tions in 
taxation 
might in- 
crease the 
revenue 
consider- 
ably but 
not suf- 
ficiently. 
An ex- 
tension of 
taxation 
to Ireland 
and the 
colonies 
would 
afford a 
larger in- 
crease. 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

be made towards that liberation, while the surplus of that revenue, 
or what is over and above defraying the annual expence of the 
peace establishment, is so very small, it seems altogether in vain to 
expect. That liberation, it is evident, can never be brought about 
without either some very considerable augmentation of the public 
revenue, or some equally considerable reduction of the public ex- 
pence. 

A more equal land tax, a more equal tax upon the rent of houses, 
and such alterations in the present system of customs and excise as 
those which have been mentioned in the foregoing chapter, might, 
perhaps, without increasing the burden of the greater part of the 
people, but only distributing the weight of it more equally upon the 
whole, produce a considerable augmentation of revenue. The most 
sanguine projector, however, could scarce flatter himself that any 
augmentation of this kind would be such as could give any reason- 
able hopes, either of liberating the public revenue altogether, or 
even of making such progress towards that liberation in time of 
peace, as either to prevent or to compensate the further accumula- 
tion of the public debt in the next war. 

By extending the British system of taxation to all the different 
provinces of the empire inhabited by people of either British or 
European extraction, a much greater augmentation of revenue 
might be expected. This, however, could scarce, perhaps, be done, 
consistently with the principles of the British constitution, with- 
out admitting into the British parliament, or if you will into the 
states-general of the British empire, a fair and equal representation 
of all those different provinces, that of each province bearing the 
same proportion to the produce of its taxes, as the representation of 
Great Britain might bear to the produce of the taxes levied upon 
Great Britain. The private interest of many powerful individuals, 
the confirmed prejudices of great bodies of people seem, indeed, at 
present, to oppose to so great a change such obstacles as it may be 
very difficult, perhaps altogether impossible, to surmount. Without, 
however, pretending to determine whether such a union be practi- 
cable or impracticable, it may not, perhaps, be improper, in a spec- 
ulative work of this kind, to consider how far the British system of 
taxation might be applicable to all the different provinces of the 
empire; what revenue might be expected from it if so applied, and 
in what manner a general union of this kind might be likely to af- 
fect the happiness and prosperity of the different provinces compre- 
hended within it. Such a speculation can at worst be regarded but 

^ Ed. I reads “neither of.” 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^^7 

as a new Utopia, less amusing certainly, but not more useless and 
chimerical than the old one. 

The land-tax, the stamp-duties, and the different duties of cus- 
toms and excise, constitute the four principal branches of the Brit- 
ish taxes. 

Ireland is certainly as able, and our American and West Indian 
plantations more able to pay a land-tax than Great Britain. Where 
the landlord is subject neither to tithe nor poors rate, he must cer- 
tainly be more able to pay such a tax, than where he is subject to 
both those other burdens. The tithe, where there is no modus, and 
where it is levied in kind, diminishes more what would otherwise be 
the rent of the landlord, than a land-tax which really amounted to 
five shillings in the pound. Such a tithe will be found in most cases 
to amount to more than a fourth part of the real rent of the land, 
or of what remains after replacing completely the capital of the 
farmer, together with his reasonable profit. If all moduses and all 
impropriations were taken away, the complete church tithe of 
Great Britain and Ireland could not well be estimated at less than 
six or seven millions. If there was no tithe either in Great Britain 
or Ireland, the landlords could afford to pay six or seven millions 
additional land-tax, without being more burdened than a very great 
part of them are at present. America pays no tithe, and could 
therefore very well afford to pay a land-tax. The lands in America 
and the West Indies, indeed, are in general not tenanted nor 
leased out to farmers. They could not therefore be assessed accord- 
ing to any rent-roll. But neither were the lands of Great Britain, 
in the 4th of William and Mary, assessed according to any rent-roll, 
but according to a very loose and inaccurate estimation. The lands 
in America might be assessed either in the same manner, or accord- 
ing to an equitable valuation in consequence of an accurate survey, 
like that which was lately made in tie Milanese, and in the do- 
minions of Austria, Prussia, and Sardinia.®^ 

Stamp-duties, it is evident, might be levied without any variation 
in all countries where the forms of law process, and the deeds by 
which property both real and personal is transferred, are the same 
or nearly the same. 

The extension of the custom-house laws of Great Britain to Ire- 
land and the plantations, provided it was accompanied, as in justice 
it ought to be, with an extension of the freedom of trade, would be 
in the highest degree advantageous to both. All the invidious re- 
straints which at present oppress the trade of Ireland, the distinc- 

Ed. I reads “or.” “Above, pp. 780, 786, 787. 


The land- 
tax could 
well be 
extended 
to Ire- 
land, 
America 
and the 
West 
Indies. 


Stamp 
duties 
could 
easily be 
extended. 

The ex- 
tension 
of the 
customs 
would be 
of great 



advan- 
tage to 
all, as it 
would be 
accom- 
panied by 
an exten- 
sion of 
free trade. 


Excise 
duties 
would re- 
quire 
some 
variation, 


as for 
example 
in the 
case of 
American 
beer. 


888 the wealth OF NATIONS 

tion between the enumerated and non-enumerated commodities of 
America, would be entirely at an end.^® The countries north of 
Cape Finisterre would be as open to every part of the produce of 
America, as those south of that Cape are to some parts of that pro- 
duce at present. The trade between all the different parts of the 
British empire would, in consequence of this uniformity in the cus- 
tom-house laws, be as free as the coasting trade of Great Britain is 
at present. The British empire would thus afford within itself an 
immense internal market for every part of the produce of all its dif- 
ferent provinces. So great an extension of market would soon com- 
pensate both to Ireland and the plantations, all that they could suf- 
fer from the increase of the duties of customs. 

The excise is the only part of the British system of taxation, 
which would require to be varied in any respect according as it was 
applied to the different provinces of the empire. It might be ap- 
plied to Ireland without any variation; the produce and consump- 
tion of that kingdom being exactly of the same nature with those 
of Great Britain. In its application to America and the West In- 
dies, of which the produce and consumption are so very different 
from those of Great Britain, some modification might be necessary, 
in the same manner as in its application to the cyder and beer coun- 
ties of England. 

A fermented liquor, for example, which is called beer, but which, 
as it is made of melasses, bears very little resemblance to our beer, 
makes a considerable part of the common drink of the people in 
America. This liquor, as it can be kept only for a few days, cannot, 
like our beer, be prepared and stored up for sale in great breweries ; 
but every private family must brew it for their own use, in the same 
manner as they cook their victuals. But to subject every private 
family to the odious visits and examination of the tax-gatherers, in 
the same manner as we subject the keepers of alehouses and the 
brewers for public sale, would be altogether inconsistent with lib- 
erty. If for the sake of equality it was thought necessary to lay a 
tax upon this liquor, it might be taxed by taxing the material of 
which it is made, either at the place of manufacture, or, if the cir- 
cumstances of the trade rendered such an excise improper, by lay- 
ing a duty upon its importation into the colony in which it was to 
be consumed. Besides the duty of one penny a gallon imposed by 
the British parliament upon the importation of melasses into Amer- 
ica; there is a provincial tax of this kind upon their importation in- 
to Massachusets Bay, in ships belonging to any other colony, of 
eight-pence the hogshead; and another upon their importation, 

Above, pp. 543, 544. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


889 

from the northern colonies, into South Carolina, of five-pence the 
gallon. Or if neither of these methods was found convenient, each 
family might compound for its consumption of this liquor, either 
according to the number of persons of which it consisted, in the 
same manner as private families compound for the malt-tax in Eng- 
land; or according to the different ages and sexes of those persons, 
in the same manner as several different taxes are levied in Holland; 
or nearly as Sir Matthew Decker proposes that all taxes upon con- 
sumable commodities should be levied in England,®^ This mode of 
taxation, it has already been observed, when applied to objects of 
a speedy consumption, is not a very convenient one. It might be 
adopted, however, in cases where no better could be done. 

Sugar, rum, and tobacco, are commodities which are no where 
necessaries of life, which are become objects of almost universal 
consumption, and which are therefore extremely proper subjects of 
taxation. If a union with the colonies were to take place, those 
commodities might be taxed either before they go out of the hands 
of the manufacturer or grower; or if this mode of taxation did not 
suit the circumstances of those persons, they might be deposited in 
public warehouses both at the place of manufacture, and at all the 
different ports of the empire to which they might afterwards be 
transported, to remain there, under the joint custody of the owner 
and the revenue officer, till such time as they should be delivered 
out either to the consumer, to the merchant retailer for home-con- 
sumption, or to the merchant exporter, the tax not to be advanced 
till such delivery. When delivered out for exportation, to go duty 
free; upon proper security being given that they should really be 
exported out of the empire. These are perhaps the principal com- 
modities with regard to which a union with the colonies might re- 
quire some considerable change in the present system of British 
taxation. 

What might be the amount of the revenue which this system of 
taxation extended to all the different provinces of the empire might 
produce, it must, no doubt, be altogether impossible to ascertain 
with tolerable exactness. By means of this system there is annually 
levied in Great Britain, upon less than eight millions of people, 
more than ten millions of revenue. Ireland contains more than two 
millions of people, and according to the accounts laid before the 
congress,^'® the twelve associated provinces of America contain 
more than three. Those accounts, however, may have been exag- 

Above, p. 828. ®Eds. 1-3 read “was.” 

Given in the Continuation of Anderson’s Commerce, a.d. 1774, vol. iv., 
p, 178, in ed. of 1801. 


Sugar, 
rum and 
tobacco 
could be 
made sub- 
ject to 
excise. 


The in- 
crease of 
revenue 
thus ob- 
tained, if 
propor- 
tionate to 
the in- 
creased 
popula- 
tion 
taxed, 



would 
yield six 
millions 
and a 
quarter to 
be ap- 
plied in 
reduction 
of debt, 
and this 
sum 

would of 
course be 
agrow- 
ing one. 


890 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

gerated, in order, perhaps, either to encourage their own people, or 
to intimidate those of this country, and we shall suppose therefore 
that our North American and West Indian colonies taken together 
contain no more than three millions; or that the whole British em- 
pire, in Europe and America, contains no more than thirteen mil- 
lions of inhabitants. If upon less than eight millions of inhabitants 
this system of taxation raises a revenue of more than ten millions 
sterling; it ought upon thirteen millions of inhabitants to raise a 
revenue of more than sixteen millions two hundred and fifty thou- 
sand pounds sterling. From this revenue, supposing that this sys- 
tem could produce it, must be deducted, the revenue usually raised 
in Ireland and the plantations for defraying the expence of their 
respective civil governments. The expence of the civil and military 
establishment of Ireland, together with the interest of the public 
debt, amounts, at a medium of the two years which ended March 
1775, to something less than seven hundred and fifty thousand 
pounds a year. By a very exact account’’'^ of the revenue of the 
principal colonies of America and the West Indies, it amounted, be- 
fore the commencement of the present disturbances, to a hundred 
and forty-one thousand eight hundred pounds. In this account, 
however, the revenue of Maryland, of North Carolina, and of all 
our late acquisitions both upon the continent and in the islands, is 
omitted, which may perhaps make a difference of thirty or forty 
thousand pounds. For the sake of even numbers therefore, let us 
suppose that the revenue necessary for supporting the civil govern- 
ment of Ireland and the plantations, may amount to a million. 
There would remain consequently a revenue of fifteen millions two 
hundred and fifty thousand pounds, to be applied towards defray- 
ing the general expence of the empire, and towards pa3dng the pub- 
lic debt. But if from the present revenue of Great Britain a million 
could in peaceable times be spared towards the payment of that 
debt, six millions two hundred and fifty thousand pounds could 
very well be spared from this improved revenue. This great sinking 
fund too might be augmented every year by the interest of the 
debt which had been discharged the year before, and might in this 
manner increase so very rapidly, as to be sufficient in a few years 
to discharge the whole debt, and thus to restore completely the at 
present debilitated and languishing vigour of the empire. In the 
mean time the people might be relieved from some of the most 
burdensome taxes; from those which are imposed either upon the 
necessaries of life, or upon the materials of manufacture. The la- 
bouring poor would thus be enabled to live better, to work cheaper, 

Above, p. 540. ^ Ed. i reads “late”; cp. above, p. 465. 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^9i 

and to send their goods cheaper to market. The cheapness of their 
goods would increase the demand for them, and consequently for 
the labour of those who produced them. This increase in the de- 
mand for labour, would both increase the numbers and improve the 
circumstances of the labouring poor. Their consumption would in- 
crease, and together with it the revenue arising from all those arti- 
cles of their consumption upon which the taxes might be allowed 
to remain. 

The revenue arising from this system of taxation, however, might Some 
not immediately increase in proportion to the number of people who 
were subjected to it. Great indulgence would for some time be due tions 

to those provinces of the empire which were thus subjected to bur- froin this 

thens to which they had not before been accustomed, and even when be 

the same taxes came to be levied every where as exactly as possible, counter- 
they would not every where produce a revenue proportioned to the 
numbers of the people. In a poor country the consumption of the tio4 re- 
principal commodities subject to the duties of customs and excise is suiting 
very small; and in a thinly inhabited country the opportunities of 
smuggling are very great. The consumption of malt liquors among simple al- 
the inferior ranks of people in Scotland is very small, and the excise terations. 
upon malt, beer, and ale, produces less there than in England in 
proportion to the numbers of the people and the rate of the duties, 
which upon malt is different on account of a supposed difference 
of quality. In these particular branches of the excise, there is not, I 
apprehend, much more smuggling in the one country than in the 
other. The duties upon the distillery, and the greater part of the 
duties of customs, in proportion to the numbers of people in the 
respective countries, produce less in Scotland than in England, not 
only on account of the smaller consumption of the taxed commodi- 
ties, but of the much greater facility of smuggling. In Ireland, the 
inferior ranks of people are still poorer than in Scotland, and many 
parts of the country are almost as thinly inhabited. In Ireland, 
therefore, the consumption of the taxed commodities might, in pro- 
portion to the number of the people, be still less than in Scotland, 
and the facility of smuggling nearly the same. In America and the 
West Indies the white people even of the lowest rank are in much 
better circumstances than those of the same rank in England, and 
their consumption of all the luxuries in which they usually indulge 
themselves is probably much greater. The blacks, indeed, who make 
the greater part of the inhabitants both of the southern colonies up- 
on the continent and of the West India islands, as they are in a 
state of slavery, are, no doubt, in a worse condition than the poor- 


”Eds. r and 2 read “West Indian.’ 



The 
Ameri- 
cans have 
little gold 
and silver, 


but this is 
the effect 
of choice, 
not neces- 
sity. 


S92 THE WEALTH OE NATIONS 

est people either in Scotland or Ireland. We must not, however, up- 
on the account, imagine that they are worse fed, or that their con- 
sumption of articles which might be subjected to moderate duties, 
is less than that even of the lower ranks of people in England. In 
order that they may work well, it is the interest of their master that 
they should be fed well and kept in good heart, in the same manner 
as it is his interest that his working cattle should be so. The blacks 
accordingly have almost every where their allowance of rum and 
of melasses or spruce beer, in the same manner as the white ser- 
vants; and this allowance would not probably be withdrawn, 
though those articles should be subjected to moderate duties. The 
consumption of the taxed commodities, therefore, in proportion to 
the number of inhabitants, would probably be as great in America 
and the West Indies as in any part of the British empire. The op- 
portunities of smuggling indeed, would be much greater; America, 
in proportion to the extent of the country, being much more thinly 
inhabited than either Scotland or Ireland. If the revenue, however, 
which is at present raised by the different duties upon malt and 
malt liquors, were*^^ to be levied by a single duty upon malt, the 
opportunity of smuggling in the most important branch of the ex- 
cise would be almost entirely taken away: And if the duties of cus- 
toms, instead of being imposed upon almost all the different articles 
of importation, were confined to a few of the most general use and 
consumption, and if the levying of those duties were subjected to 
the excise laws, the opportunity of smuggling, though not so en- 
tirely taken away, would be very much diminished. In consequence 
of those two, apparently, very simple and easy alterations, the du- 
ties of customs and excise might probably produce a revenue as 
great in proportion to the consumption of the most thinly inhabited 
province, as they do at present in proportion to that of the most 
populous. 

The Americans, it has been siid, indeed, have no gold or silver 
money; the interior commerce of the country being carried on by 
a paper currency, and the gold and silver which occasionally come 
among them being all sent to Great Britain in return for the com- 
modities which they receive from us. But without gold and silver, 
it is added, there is no possibility of paying taxes. We already get 
all the gold and silver which they have. How is it possible to draw 
from them what they have not? 

The present scarcity of gold and silver money in America is not 
the effect of the poverty of that country, or of the inability of the 
people there to purchase those metals. In a country where the 

’®Eds. 1-3 read ‘Vas” here and five lines below. 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


893 

wages of labour are so much higher, and the price of provisions so 
much lower than in England, the greater part of the people must 
surely have wherewithal to purchase a greater quantity, if it were 
either necessary or convenient for them to do so. The scarcity of 
those metals therefore, must be the effect of choice, and not of 
necessity. 

It is for transacting either domestic or foreign business, that gold 
and silver money is either necessary or convenient. 

The domestic business of every country, it has been shewn in the 
second book of this Inquiry,'^" may, at least in peaceable times, be 
transacted by means of a paper currency, with nearly the same de- 
gree of conveniency as by gold and silver money. It is convenient 
for the Americans, who could always employ with profit in the 
improvement of their lands a greater stock than they can easily get, 
to save as much as possible the expence of so costly an instrument 
of commerce as gold and silver, and rather to employ that part of 
their surplus produce which would be necessary for purchasing 
those metals, in purchasing the instruments of trade, the materials 
of clothing, several parts of household furniture, and the iron-work 
necessary for building and extending their settlements and planta- 
tions; in purchasing, not dead stock, but active and productive 
stock. The colony governments find it for their interest to supply 
the people with such a quantity of paper-money as is fully suffi- 
cient and generally more than sufficient for transacting their do- 
mestic business. Some of those governments, that of Pennsylvania 
particularly, derive a revenue from lending this paper-money to 
their subjects at an interest of so much per cent. Others, like that 
of Massachusett’s Bay, advance upon extraordinary emergencies a 
paper-money of this kind for defraying the public expence, and 
afterv/ards, when it suits the conveniency of the colony, redeem it 
at the depreciated value to which it gradually falls. In 1747 that 
colony paid, in this manner, the greater part of its public debts, 
with the tenth part of the money for which its bills had been grant- 
ed. It suits the conveniency of the planters to save the expence of 
employing gold and silver money in their domestic transaction; and 
it suits the conveniency of the colony governments to supply them 
with a medium, which, though attended with some very consider- 
able disadvantages, enables them to save that expence. The re- 
dundancy of paper-money necessarily banishes gold and silver from 

^*Eds. 1-3 read “was” Above, pp. 276-281. 

™ Ed. I omits “the.” 

See Hutchinson’s Hist, of Massachusett’s Bay, Vol. II., page 436 & seq. 
History of the Colony of Massachusetts Bay^ 2nd ed., 1765-8. 


Paper 3S 
more con- 
venient to 
the Amer- 
icans for 
home 
trade, 



while for 
their ex- 
ternal 
trade they 
use as 
much 
gold and 
silver as 
is neces- 
sary. 

In the 
trade be- 
tween 
Great 
Britain 
and Vir- 
ginia and 
Maryland 
tobacco is 
a more 
conveni- 
ent cur- 
rency 
than gold 
and silver. 


The 

northern 
colonies 
generally 
find the 


S94 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

the domestic transactions of the colonies, for the same reason that 
it has banished those metals from the greater part of the domestic 
transactions in Scotland; and in both countries it is not the pov- 
erty, but the enterprizing and projecting spirit of the people, their 
desire of employing all the stock which they can get as active and 
productive stock, which has occasioned this redundancy of paper- 
money. 

In the exterior commerce which the different colonies carry on 
with Great Britain, gold and silver are more or less employed, ex- 
actly in proportion as they are more or less necessary. Where those 
metals are not necessary, they seldom appear. Where they are nec- 
essary, they are generally found. 

In the commerce between Great Britain and the tobacco colonies, 
the British goods are generally advanced to the colonists at a pretty 
long credit, and are afterwards paid for in tobacco, rated at a cer- 
tain price. It is more convenient for the colonists to pay in tobacco 
than in gold and silver. It would be more convenient for any mer- 
chant to pay for the goods which his correspondents had sold to 
him in some other sort of goods which he might happen to deal in, 
than in money. Such a merchant would have no occasion to keep 
any part of his stock by him unemployed, and in ready money, for 
answering occasional demands. He could have, at all times, a larger 
quantity of goods in his shop or warehouse, and he could deal to a 
greater extent. But it seldom happens to be convenient for all the 
correspondents of a merchant to receive payment for the goods 
which they sell to him, in goods of some otier kind which he hap- 
pens to deal in. The British merchants who trade to Virginia and 
Maryland happen to be a particular set of correspondents, to whom 
it is more convenient to receive payment for the goods which they 
sell to those colonies in tobacco than in gold and silver. They ex- 
pect to make a profit by the sale of the tobacco. They could make 
none by that of the gold and silver. Gold and silver, therefore, very 
seldom appear in the commerce between Great Britain and the 
tobacco colonies. Maryland and Virginia have as little occasion for 
those metals in their foreign as in their domestic commerce. They 
are said, accordingly, to have less gold and silver money than any 
other colonies in America. They are reckoned, however, as thriv- 
ing, and consequently as rich, as any of their neighbours. 

In the northern colonies, Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey, 
the four governments of New England, &c. the value of their own 
produce which they export to Great Britain is not equal to that 
of the manufactures which they import for their own use, and for 

™Ed. I reads “of.” 



PUBLIC DEBTS 


895 

that of some of the other colonies to which they are the carriers. 
A balance, therefore, must be paid to the mother country in gold 
and silver, and this balance they generally find. 

In the sugar colonies the value of the produce annually exported 
to Great Britain is much greater than that of all the goods imported 
from thence. If the sugar and rum annually sent to the mother 
country were paid for in those colonies. Great Britain would be 
obliged to send out every year a very large balance in money, and 
the trade to the West Indies would, by a certain species of politi- 
cians, be considered as extremely disadvantageous. But it so hap- 
pens, that many of the principal proprietors of the sugar planta- 
tions reside in Great Britain. Their rents are remitted to them in 
sugar and rum, the produce of their estates. The sugar and rum 
which the West India merchants purchase in those colonies upon 
their own account, are not equal in value to the goods which they 
annually sell there. A balance therefore must necessarily be paid 
to them in gold and silver, and this balance too is generally found. 

The difficulty and irregularity of payment from the different col- 
onies to Great Britain, have not been at all in proportion to the 
greatness or smallness of the balances which were respectively due 
from them. Payments have in general been more regular from the 
northern than from the tobacco colonies, though the former have 
generally paid a pretty large balance in money, while the latter 
have either paid no balance, or a much smaller one. The difficulty 
of getting payment from our different sugar colonies has been 
greater or less in proportion, not so much to the extent of the bal- 
ances respectively due from them, as to the quantity of uncultivated 
land which they contained; that is, to the greater or smaller temp- 
tation which the planters have been under of over-trading, or of 
undertaking the settlement and plantation of greater quantities of 
waste land than suited the extent of their capitals. The returns from 
the great island of Jamaica, where there is still much uncultivated 
land, have, upon this account, been in general more irregular and 
uncertain, than those from the smaller islands of Barbadoes, An- 
tigua, and St. Christophers, which have for these many years been 
completely cultivated, and have, upon that account, afforded less 
field for the speculations of the planter. The new acquisitions of 
Grenada, Tobago, St. Vincents, and Dominica, have opened a 
new field for speculations of this kind; and the returns from those 
islands have of late been as irregular and uncertain as those from 
the great island of Jamaica. 

I reads “must generally.” ^’Ed. i reads “paid either.” 

Above, p. 54S, note 43. 


gold and 
silver ne- 
cessary to 
pay the 
balance 
on theii 
trade 
with 
Great 
Britain 

The sugar 
colonies 
generally 
find the 
gold and 
silver ne- 
cessary to 
pay the 
balance 
to Great 
Britain 
which 
arises 
from the 
sugar 
planters 
being ab- 
sentees. 


Any dif- 
ficulties 
have not 
been pro- 
portion- 
ate to the 
size of the 
balance 
due, 



and have 
arisen 
from un- 
necessary 
and ex- 
cessive 
enter- 
prise. 


It is 
justice 
That Ire- 
land and 
America 
should 


896 THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

It is not, therefore, the poverty of the colonies which occasions, 
in the greater part of them, the present scarcity of gold and silver 
money. Their great demand for active and productive stock makes 
it convenient for them to have as little dead stock as possible; and 
disposes them upon that account to content themselves with a 
cheaper, though less commodious instrument of commerce than 
gold and silver. They are thereby enabled to convert the value of 
that gold and silver into the instruments of trade, into the mate- 
rials of clothing, into household furniture, and into the iron work 
necessary for building and. extending their settlements and planta- 
tions. In those branches of business which cannot be transacted 
without gold and silver money, it appears, that they can always 
find the necessary quantity of those metals; and if they frequently 
do not find it, their failure is generally the effect, not of their neces- 
sary poverty, but of their unnecessary and excessive enterprize. It 
is not because they are poor that their payments are irregular and 
uncertain; but because they are too eager to become excessively 
rich. Though all that part of the produce of the colony taxes, which 
was over and above what was necessary for defraying the expence 
of their own civil and military establishments, were to be remitted 
to Great Britain in gold and silver, the colonies have abundantly 
wherewithal to purchase the requisite quantity of those metals. 
They would in this case be obliged, indeed, to exchange a part of 
their surplus produce, with which they now purchase active and 
productive stock, for dead stock. In transacting their domestic busi- 
ness they would be obliged to employ a costly instead of a cheap 
instrument of commerce; and the expence of purchasing this costly 
instrument might damp somewhat the vivacity and ardour of their 
excessive enterprize in the improvement of land. It might not, how- 
ever, be necessary to remit any part of the American revenue in 
gold and silver. It might be remitted in bills drawn upon and ac- 
cepted by particular merchants or companies in Great Britain, to 
whom a part of the surplus produce of America had been consigned, 
who would pay into the treasury the AmerLan revenue in money, 
after having themselves received the value of it in goods; and the 
whole business might frequently be transacted without exporting a 
single ounce of gold or silver from America. 

It is not contrary to justice that both Ireland and America should 
contribute towards the discharge of the public debt of Great Brit- 
ain. That debt has been contracted in support of the government 
established by the Revolution, a government to which the protes- 
tants of Ireland owe, not only the whole authority which they at 

Ed. I reads “gold and silver.” 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^97 

present enjoy in their own country, but every security which they 
possess for their liberty, their property, and their religion; a gov- 
ernment to which several of the colonies of America owe their pres- 
ent charters, and consequently their present constitution, and to 
which all the colonies of America owe the liberty, security, and 
property which they have ever since enjoyed. That public debt has 
been contracted in the defence, not of Great Britain alone, but of 
all the different provinces of the empire; the immense debt con- 
tracted in the late war in particular, and a great part of that con- 
tracted in the war before, were both properly contracted in defence 
of America. 

By a union with Great Britain, Ireland would gain, besides the 
freedom of trade, other advantages much more important, and 
which would much more than compensate any increase of 
taxes that might accompany that union. By the union with Eng- 
land, the middling and inferior ranks of people in Scotland gained 
a complete deliverance from the power of an aristocracy which had 
always before oppressed them. By an union with Great Britain, the 
greater part of the people of all ranks in Ireland would gain an 
equally complete deliverance from a much more oppressive aris- 
tocracy; an aristocracy not founded, like that of Scotland, in the 
natural and respectable distinctions of birth and fortune; but in the 
most odious of all distinctions, those of religious and political prej- 
udices; distinctions which, more than any other, animate both the 
insolence of the oppressors and the hatred and indignation of the 
oppressed, and which commonly render the inhabitants of the same 
country more hostile to one another than those of different coun- 
tries ever are. Without a union with Great Britain, the inhabitants 
of Ireland are not likely for many ages to consider themselves as 
one people. 

No oppressive aristocracy has ever prevailed in the colonies. 
Even they, however, would, in point of happiness and tranquillity, 
gain considerably by a union with Great Britain. It would, at least, 
deliver them from those rancorous and virulent factions which are 
inseparable from small democracies, and which have so frequently 
divided the affections of their people, and disturbed the tranquillity 
of their governments, in their form so nearly democratical. In the 
case of a total separation from Great Britain, which, unless pre- 
vented by a union of this kind, seems very likely to take place, 
those factions would be ten times more virulent than ever. Before 
the commencement of the present disturbances, the coercive power 
of the mother-country had always been able to restrain those fac- 
tions from breaking out into any thing worse than gross brutality 


contri- 
bute to 
the dis- 
charge of 
the Brit- 
ish debt. 


Union 
would 
deliver 
Ireland 
from an 
oppres- 
sive aris- 
tocracy 
founded 
on reli- 
gious and 
political 
preju- 
dices. 


The colo- 
nies 

would be 
delivered 
from 
rancoroib 
factions 
which are 
likely to 
lead to 
bloodshed 
in case of 
separa- 
tion from 
Great 
Britain. 



East 
India 
with 
fighter 
taxes and 
iess cor- 
rupt ad- 
ministra- 
tion 
might 
yield an 
wen 

larger ad- 
dition of 
revenue. 


If no such 
aug- 
mentation 
of reve- 
nue can 
be ob- 
tained 
Great 
Britain 
should re- 


89S the wealth of nations 

and insult. If that coercive power were entirely taken away, they 
would probably soon break out into open violence and bloodshed. 
In all great countries which are united under one uniform govern- 
ment, the spirit of party commonly prevails less in the remote pro- 
vinces than in the centre of the empire. The distance of those pro- 
vinces from the capital, from the principal seat of the great scram- 
ble of faction and ambition, makes them enter less into the views 
of any of the contending parties, and renders them more indifferent 
and impartial spectators of the conduct of all. The spirit of party 
prevails less in Scotland than in England. In the case of a union it 
would probably prevail less in Ireland than in Scotland, and the 
colonies would probably soon enjoy a degree of concord and una- 
nimity at present unknown in any part of the British empire. Both 
Ireland and the colonies, indeed, would be subjected to heavier 
taxes than any which they at present pay. In consequence, how- 
ever, of a diligent and faithful application of the public revenue 
towards the discharge of the national debt, the greater part of those 
taxes might not be of long continuance, and the public revenue of 
Great Britain might soon be reduced to what was necessary for 
maintaining a moderate peace establishment. 

The territorial acquisitions of the East India company, the un- 
doubted right of the crown, that is, of the state and people of Great 
Britain, might be rendered another source of revenue more abun- 
dant, perhaps, than all those already mentioned. Those countries 
are represented as more fertile, more extensive; and, in proportion 
to their extent, much richer and more populous than Great Britain. 
In order to draw a great revenue from them, it would not probably 
be necessary, to introduce any new system of taxation into coun- 
tries which are already sufficiently and more than sufficiently taxed. 
It might, perhaps, be more proper to lighten, than to aggravate, the 
burden of those unfortunate countries, and to endeavour to draw a 
revenue from them, not by imposing new taxes, but by preventing 
the embezzlement and misapplication of the greater part of those 
which they already pay. 

If it should be found impracticable for Great Britain to draw any 
considerable augmentation of revenue from any of the resources 
above mentioned; the only resource which can remain to her is a 
diminution of her expence. In the mode of collecting, and in that 
of expending the public revenue; though in both there may be still 
room for improvement; Great Britain seems to be at least as ceco- 
nomical as any of her neighbours. The military establishment which 
she maintains for her own defence in time of peace, is more moder- 

®®Eds. 1-5 read “was.” 



PUBLIC DEBTS ^99 

ate than that of any European state which can pretend to rival her 
either in wealth or in power. None of those articles, therefore, seem 
to admit of any considerable reduction of expence. The expence of 
the peace establishment of the colonies was, before the commence- 
ment of the present disturbances, very considerable, and is an ex- 
pence which may, and if no revenue can be drawn from them, ought 
certainly to be saved altogether. This constant expence in time of 
peace, though very great, is insignificant in comparison with what 
the defence of the colonies has cost us in time of war. The last war, 
which was undertaken altogether on account of the colonies, cost 
Great Britain, it has already been observed, upwards of ninety mil- 
lions.®^ The Spanish war of 1739 was principally undertaken on 
their account; in which, and in ihe French war that was the conse- 
quence of it. Great Britain spent upwards of forty millions, a great 
part of which ought justly to be charged to the colonies. In those 
two wars the colonies cost Great Britain much more than double 
the sum which the national debt amounted to before the commence- 
ment of the first of them. Had it not been for those wars that debt 
might, and probably would by this time, have been completely 
paid; and had it not been for the colonies, the former of those wars 
might not, and the latter certainly would not have been under- 
taken. It was because the colonies were supposed to be provinces of 
the British empire, that this expence was laid out upon them. But 
countries which contribute neither revenue nor military force to- 
wards the support of the empire, cannot be considered as provinces. 
They may perhaps be considered as appendages, as a sort of splen- 
did and showy equipage of the empire. But if the empire can no 
longer support the expence of keeping up this equipage, it ought 
certainly to lay it down; and if it cannot raise its revenue in pro- 
portion to its expence, it ought, at least, to accommodate its ex- 
pence to its revenue. If the colonies, notwithstanding their refusal 
to submit to British taxes, are still to be considered as provinces of 
the British empire, their defence in some future war may cost 
Great Britain as great an expence as it ever has done in any former 
war. The rulers of Great Britain have, for more than a century 
past, amused the people with the imagination that they possessed a 
great empire on the west side of the Atlantic. This empire, how- 
ever, has hitherto existed in imagination only. It has hitherto been, 
not an empire, but the project of an empire; not a gold mine, but 
the project of a gold mine; a project which has cost, which con- 
tinues to cost, and which, if pursued in the same way as it has been 
hitherto, is likely to cost, immense expence, without being likely to 

^ Above, p. 410. 


duce her 
expenses 
by rid- 
ding her- 
self of the 
cost of 
the colo- 
nies in 
peace and 
war. 



900 XHE WEALTH OF NATIONS 

bring any profit; for the effects of the monopoly of the colony 
trade, it has been shewn,®® are, to the great body of the people, 
mere loss instead of profit. It is surely now time that our rulers 
should either realize this golden dream, in which they have been 
indulging themselves, perhaps, as well as the people; or, that they 
should awake from it themselves, and endeavour to awaken the 
people. If the project cannot be completed, it ought to be given up. 
If any of the provinces of the British empire cannot be made to 
contribute towards the support of the whole empire, it is surely 
time that Great Britain should free herself from the expence of de- 
fending those provinces in time of war, and of supporting any part 
of their civil or military establishments in time of peace, and en- 
deavour to accommodate her future views and designs to the real 
mediocrity of her circumstances. 

“Above, pp. SS7-S96. 



APPENDIX^ 


The two following Accounts are subjoined in order to illustrate 
and confirm what is said in the Fifth Chapter of the Fourth Book,^ 
concerning the Tonnage bounty to the White Herring Fishery. The 
Reader, I believe, may depend upon the accuracy of both Ac- 
counts. 

An Account of Busses fitted out in Scotland for Eleven Years ^ with the Number of 
Empty Barrels carried out, and the Number of Barrels of Herrings co/ught; 
also the Bounty at a Medium on each Barrel of Seasteeks, and on each Barrel 
when fully packed. 


Years. 

Number of 
Busses. 

Empty 
Barrels 
carried out. 

Barrels of 
Herrings 
caught. 

Bounty paid on 
the Busses. 





£. 


d. 

1771 

29 

S948 

2832 

2085 

0 

0 

1772 

168 

41316 

22237 

11033 

7 

6 

1773 

190 

42333 

4203s 

12510 

8 

6 

1774 

248 

S9303 

56363 

16952 

2 

6 

177s 

275 

69144 

32879 

193 13 

IS 

0 

1776 

294 

76329 

31863 

21290 

7 

6 

1777 

240 

62679 

43313 

17392 

2 

6 

1778 

220 

36390 

40938 

16316 

2 

6 

1779 

206 

SS194 

29367 

13287 

0 

0 

1780 

181 

48313 

19883 

1 3443 

12 

6 

1781 

135 

33992 

16393 

9613 

12 

6 

Total, 

2186 

SS0943 

378347 

155463 

II 

0 


Seasteeks 37S347 Bounty at a medium for each barrel of sea- 
steeks, £. o 8 aj 

But a barrel of seasteeks being only reckoned two- 
thirds of a barrel fully packed, one-third is deducted, 
I deducted 126115! which brings the bounty to £. o 12 3-! 


Barrels full \ 
packed, / ^52231-4- 

^ See above, p. 486. 

“ In Additions and Corrections this matter is printed in the text, and con- 
sequently the reading here is “confirm what is said above.” 

901 






902 


THE WEALTH OF NATIONS 


Brought over — ^£. o 12 3$ 


And if the herrings are exported, there is besides a pre- 
mium of o 2 8 

So that the bounty paid by Government in money for each 
barrel, is ^ o 14 nf 

But if to this, the duty of the salt usually taken credit for 
as expended in curing each barrel, which at a medium is of 
foreign, one bushel and one-fourth of a bushel, at 10 s. a 
bushel, be added, viz o 12 6 

The bounty on each barrel would amount to £. i 7 5I 

If the herrings are cured with British salt, it will stand thus, viz. 

Bounty as before £, o 14 ii-J 

— ^but if to this bounty the duty on two bushels of Scots salt 
at I 5. 6 d. per bushel, supposed to be the quantity at a 
medium used in curing each barrel is added, to wit, o 3 o 

The bounty on each barrel will amount to £. o 17 iij 


And, 

When buss herrings are entered for home consumption in Scotland, and 
pay the shilling a barrel of duty, the bounty stands thus, to wit as be- 


fore £. 0 12 3f 

From which the i a barrel is to be deducted 0 i 0 


0 II 3-i 


But to that there is to be added again, the duty of the 
foreign salt used in curing a barrel of herrings, viz 0 12 6 


So that the premium allowed for each barrel of herrings 
entered for home consumption is £.1 3 gf 


If the herrings are cured with British salt, it will stand as follows, viz. 

Bounty on each barrel brought in by the busses as above. £. 0 12 3I 

From which deduct the i a barrel paid at the time they 
are entered for home consumption 0 i o 


But if to the bounty the duty on two bushels of Scots salt 
at I S. 6d. per bushel, supposed to be the quantity at a 
medium used in curing each barrel, is added, to wit, o 3 0 


^ The premium for each barrel entered for home consump- 
tion will be £. o 14 3f 


Though the loss of duties upon herrings exported cannot, per- 
haps, properly be considered as bounty; that upon herrings en- 
tered for home consumption certainly may. 



APPENDIX 


903 


An Account of the Quantity of Foreign Salt imported into Scotland, and of Scots 
Salt delivered Duty free from the Works therefor the Fishery, from the $th of 
April 1771 to the ^th of April 1782, with a Medium of both for one Year. 


PERIOD. 

Foreign Salt 
imported. 

Scots Salt de- 
livered from 
the Works. 

Bushels. 

Bushels. 

From the 5th of April 1771, to the 1 
5th of April 1782. j 

Medium for one Year 

936974 

168226 

8 si 79 tV 

15293* 


It is to be observed that the Bushel of Foreign Salt weighs 84 lb. 
that of British Salt 56 lb. only. 








INDEX 




m 


INDEX I 

SUBJECTS 


[This index is the original index, uhich appeared first in edition 3, with {in square 
brackets) additions by the present editor It covers only the text and the author's 
notes. For books quoted in the editor's notes, readers should consult Index II.] 

[Abassides, opulence of Saracen empire under, 380.] 

[Abbeville, woollen monopoly, 428.] 

[Abraham, weighed shekels, 25.] 

Absentee tax, the propriety of, considered, with reference to Ireland, 846. 
[Abyssinia, salt money, 23.] 

[Academy, the, assigned to Plato, 731.] 

[Academy of Sciences, Description des Arts et MHiers Jaites ou approuvies par 
Messieurs de Vacad^mie royale des sciences, 1761, 126.] 

[Acapulco ships, sailing between America and East Indies, 204, 207, 209.] 
Accounts of money, in modern Europe, all kept, and the value of goods com- 
puted, in silver, 39. 

[Accumulation, early state preceding, 47, 64; title of Bk ii., 259; previous and 
'necessary to division of labour, 260.) 

[Achilles, Agamemnon’s offer to, 676.] 

Actors, public, paid for the contempt attending their profession, 107. 

Adriatic, favourable to commerce, 21 J 
Adulteration of coin, worse than augmentation, 885.] 

Adulterine ^ilds, 124.] 
iEgean sea, islands of, 523.] 

.-Eolian colonies, 523.] 
yEsop’s Fables, apologues, 724.] 

Africa, [powerful king much worse off than European peasant, 12,] cause 
assigned for the barbarous state of the interior parts of that continent, 
20, 21. 

[Trade to America consists of slave trade, 537; receives rum in exchange 
for slaves, 545; manufactures from European towns, 591; no thriving colo- 
nics, 599; natives being shepherds could not be displaced, ibr, gum senega 
export, 622; necessity of forts for commerce, 690; music and dancing, 
729-30.] 

African company [one of five regulated companies, 692;] establishment and con- 
stitution of, 696-8; receive an annual allowance from r)arliament for forts 
and garrisons, 697-8; the company not under sufficient controul, 698; 
history of the Royal African company, 700-1; decline of, ib.; rise of the 
present company, 701. 

[Agamemnon’s recommendation of his cities, 676.] 

Age, the foundation of rank and precedency in rude as well as civilized societies, 
671. 

[Agen, land tax in, 805.] 

Aggregate fund, in the British finances, explained, 867. 

Agio of the bank of Amsterdam [how accounted for by some people, 312;] ex- 
plained, 445; of the bank of Hamburgh, 447; the agio at Amsterdam, how 
kept at a medium rate, 453. 


907 



9o8 index 

# 

[Agrarian law, the foundation of Rome, 524.] 

[Agricultural Systems, 627-51.] 

Agriculture, the labour of, does not admit of such subdivisions as manufactures, 
6; this impossibility of separation, prevents agriculture from improving 
equally with manufactures, 6; natural state of, in a new colony, 92; requires 
more knowledge and experience than most mechanical professions, and yet 
is carried on without any restrictions, 127; the terms of rent, how adjusted 
between landlord and tenant, 144; is extended by good roads and navigable 
canals, 147; under what circumstances pasture land is more valuable than 
arable, 149; gardening not a very gainful employment, 152-3; vines the most 
profitable article of culture, 154; estimates of profit from projects, very fal- 
lacious, [not to be promoted by discouraging manufactures, 155;] cattle 
and tillage mutually improve each other, 220; remarks on that of Scotland, 
221-2; remarks on that of North America, 223; poultry a profitable article in 
husbandry, 224; hogs, 225-6; dairy, 226; evidences of land being completely 
improved, 228; the extension of cultivation as it raises the price of animal 
food, reduces that of vegetables, 241-2; by whom and how practised under 
feudal government, 317-18; its operations not so much intended, to increase, 
as to direct, the fertility of nature, 344; has been the cause of the prosperity 
of the British colonies in America, 347; the profits of, exaggerated by pro- 
jectors, 355; [capable of absorbing more capital than has been applied to it, 
2*5.;] on equal terms, is naturally preferred to trade, 357-8; artificers neces- 
sary to the carrying it on, 2*5.; was not attended to by the Northern destroy- 
ers of the Roman empire, 361; the ancient policy of Europe unfavourable 
to, 371; was promoted by the commerce and manufactures of towns, 392; 
[favoured by law of England, 393-4;] the wealth arising from, more solid and 
durable, than that which proceeds from commerce, 396. 

Is not encouraged by the bounty on the exportation of corn, 476; why the 
proper business of new companies [? colonies], 575; the present agricultural 
system of political oeconomy adopted in France, described, 627; is dis- 
couraged by restrictions and prohibitions in trade, 636; is favoured beyond 
manufactures in China, 644; and in Indostan, 646; does not require so 
extensive a market as manufactures, 647; to check manufactures, in order 
to promote agriculture, false policy, 650-1; [supposes a settlement, 655;] 
landlords ought to be encouraged to cultivate part of their own land, 784, 
Agrigentum, rivalled mother city, 533.] 

Agrippina, her white nightingale, 219 ] 

Aides, the French, farmed, 855 ] 

Aix la Chapelle, treaty of, 704, 707, 874; university of, 763.] 

Alcavala, the tax in Spain so called, explained and considered, 850-1; the ruin of 
the Spanish manufactures attributed to this tax, ib. 

[Ale, licences to sell, 804; incidence of taxes on, 828 ] 

Alehouses, the number of, not the efiScient cause of drunkenness, 343, 459. 
Alexander the Great, private pupil of Aristotle, 133; conquests, 527.] 

Alexander III., Pope, bull for emancipation, 367 ] 

|Alien merchants taxed, 830.] 

'Alienation, fines on, 81 1.] 

Allodial rights, mistaken for feudal rights, 387; the introduction of the feudal 
law tended to moderate the authority of the allodial lords, 388. 

[Almagro went in search of gold, 529.] 

[Alsace treated as foreign, 852.] 

Ambassadors, the first motive of their appointment, 690. 

America, [colonisation has followed coast and rivers, 19; mines diminished value 
of gold and silver, 34, 191-2, 198, 236, 241, 415-6; planters are farmers as 
well as proprietors, 53;] why labour is dearer in North America than in 
England, 69, 70; [not so rich as England, 70;] great increase of population 
there, 70, 71; [people marry early yet there is a scarcity of hands, 71; British 
colonies illustrate genius of British constitution, 73; rapid propagation, 80; 
stamp act, 84;] common rate of interest there, 92; [acquisitions of territory 



INDEX 


909 


raised interest in Britain, 93; rate of profit in trade with, lower than in 
Jamaican trade, in; com could not be cultivated by factors like sugar, 157; 
skins thrown away by natives of, 162; landlords would like trees removed, 
163;] is a new market for the produce of its own silver mines, 202; the first 
accounts of the two empires of Peru and Mexico, greatly exaggerated, 203, 
416; improving state of the Spanish colonies, ih.\ [East Indies takes the 
silver of, 204; the tax forms the whole rent of Spanish gold and silver mines, 
213; slovenly husbandry in British colonies, 222-3; cattle killed for hide and 
taUow, 229; paper currency for small sums, 306-7; interior commerce com- 
pletely carried on by paper, 307;] account of the paper currency of the 
British colonies, 310, 31 1; [state of savages, like that of England in time 
of Julius Caesar, 327;] cause of the rapid prosperity of the British colonies 
there, 347; [carrying trade of goods to Europe, 354, 355;] why manufac- 
tures for distant sale have never been established there, 359; [artificers em- 
ploy savings in purchase and cultivation of land, ih,)[ its speedy improve- 
ment owing to assistance from foreign capitals, 360; [no produce returns 
such profits as sugar, 366; rapid advance founded on agriculture, 392;] 
the purchase and improvement of uncultivated lands, the most profitable 
emplo5rmcnt of capitals, 393; [first inquiry of Spaniards always for gold and 
silver, 398; discovery caused a revolution in commerce, 405; great part of 
expense of last French war laid out there, 410;] commercial alterations pro- 
duced by the discovery of, 415, 416; but two civilized nations found on the 
whole continent, 416; [European commerce with, more advantageous than 
East India trade, 417; returns to trade with, infrequent, 462-3; not more 
than three million people in British North American colonies, ih.; poorer 
than France, i6.;] the wealth of the North American colonies increased, 
though the balance of trade continued against them, 464-5. 

[Revolt, ii. 467, 470; long coastline and slender British authority, 469;] 
Madeira wine, how introduced there, ih.\ [drawback on exports to, 471; 
the war, 487; settled by different motives from Greek and Roman colonies, 
523; no necessity for, 525;] historical review of the European settlements in, 
526-31; of Spain, 534; of Holland, 535-7; of France, 538; of Britain, 538; 
ecclesiastical government in the several European colonies, 541; fish a 
principal article of trade from North America to Spain, Portugal, and the 
Mediterranean, 545; naval stores to Britain, 546; [slave labour, 553;] little 
credit due to the policy of Europe from the success of the colonies, 555; 
[folly and injustice presided over original settlement, 555; Europe magna 
virum mater, 556;] the discovery and colonization of, how far advantageous 
to Europe, 557-96, and to America, 590; [augmented European industry, 
557; an advantage to countries which never sent exports there, 557-8; 
surplus produce the source of advantage to Europe, 559; contributes no 
military force to mother countries, tb.) and little revenue, ib.‘, exclusive 
trade supposed the peculiar advantage, 560; rapid progress unforeseen, 564; 
monopoly attracted capital, 567; uncertain, remote and irregular returns of 
trade to, 568; effects of stoppage of trade, 572-3; European market for 
bread and meat extended, 575; shop-keeping policy adopted towards, 
579-80; taxation by requisition, 585; ambition of leading men, 586; possible 
removal of seat of government to, 590; discovery of, one of the two greatest 
events in history, 590; mother countries have the show but not all the 
advantages, 591-5;] the colonies in, governed by a spirit of monopoly, 
595-6; [more thriving than colonies in Africa, 599; bounty on naval stores 
from, 609; Britain sometimes courts and sometimes quarrels with, 610; 
bounties, 610-1;] the interest of the consumer in Britain sacrificed to 
that of the producer, by the system of colonization, 626; [natives of, were 
hunters, 653; and contemptible opponents, 655; colonial militia becoming a 
standing army, 662; natives of, regarded age as the sole foundation of rank, 
671; poll taxes, 808; productions of, articles of common use in Great Bri- 
tain, 834;] plan for extending the British system of taxation over all the 
provinces of, 887; the question how the Americans could pay taxes without 



910 INDEX 

specie considered, 892; ought in justice to contribute to discharge the public 
debt of Great Britain, 896; expediency of their union with Britain, 897; the 
British empire there, a mere project, 899. 

Amsterdam, [190, 421, 445, 579, 616, 770;] agio of the bank of, [how accounted 
for by some people, 312;] explained, 445; occasion of its establishment, 446, 
447; advantages attending payments there, 448; rate demanded for keeping 
money there, 448-9; prices at which bullion and coin are received, ih., note; 
this bank, the great warehouse of Europe for bullion, 451; demands upon, 
how made and answered, 451-2; the agio of, how kept at a medium rate, 
453; the treasure of, whether all preserved in its repositories, ib . ; the amount 
of its treasure only to be conjectured, 454; fees paid to the bank for trans- 
acting business, ib. 

^Anderson, Adam, quoted, 702,] 

^Anderson, James, quoted, 183, 213, 281.] 

‘Angola, 525, 599.] 

Annuities for terms of years, and for lives, in the British finances, historical 
account of, 868-869. 

^Antigua, 564, 895.] 

Antoninus, Marcus, 731.] 

Antwerp, 396, 44 Sj 446.] 

.Aperea of Brazil, 527 J 
UAiroiKtaj 525.] 

Apothecaries, the profit on their drugs imjustly stigmatized as exorbitant, 112. 

[ Apothecary shop a source of profit to Hamburg, 769-70.] 

[Apples imported from Flaiiders in seventeenth century, 7^] 

{Apprenticeship statutes raise wages more permanently than they lower them, 
61.] 

Apprenticeship, the nature and intention of this bond servitude explained, ior-2; 
the limitations imposed on various trades, as to the number of apprentices, 
118-9; statute of apprenticeship in England, 120; apprenticeships in 
France and Scotland, 121; general remarks on the tendency and operation 
of long apprenticeships, 122-3; [obstructs free circulation of labour from 
one employment to another, 134; means of gaining a settlement, 137-8;] the 
statute of, ought to be repealed, 437. 

[Relation to privileges of graduates, 719.] 

[Arabia, hospitality of chiefs, 386; histories full of genealogies, 391; riches long 
in the same family, ib.] 

[Victorious when united, 655; militia, 662; despotic authority of scherifs, 
672; revenue of chiefs consists of profit, 769.] 

[Arabia, Gulf of, favourable to commerce, 21.] 

Arabs,, their manner of supporting war, 653-4. 

;Aragon, 528.] 

Arbuthnot, Dr. John, quoted, 649.] 

’Archipelago, 573.] 

Ar^le, the Duke of, 387.] 

^Aristotle, munificently rewarded by Philip and Alexander, 133; Lyceum as- 
signed to, 731; a teacher, 764; quoted, 365, 729.] 

[Arithmetic, political, untrustworthy, 501; of the customs, two and two make 
one, 83 2. J 

[Armada, the defeat of, stopped Spanish obstruction of colonisation, 536; less 
alarming than the rupture with the colonies, 571.] 

Army, [a disadvantageous lottery, 109;] three different ways by which a nation 
may maintain one in a distant country, 409; standing, distinction between 
aid a militia, 660; historical reivew of, 663; the Macedonian army, ib.; 
Carthaginian army,^ 663-4; Roman army, 664-5; [courageous without 
active service, 666;] is alone able to perpetuate the civilization of a country, 
667; is the speediest engine for civilizing a barbarous country, ib.; under 
what circumstances dangerous to, and under what, favourable to liberty, 



INDEX 911 

667-8; [small, would be suficient if martial spirit prevailed, 73S-9; no se- 
curity to the sovereign against a disaffected clergy, 749.] 

Artificers, prohibited by law from going to foreign countries, 624; icsiding 
abroad, and not returning on notice, exposed to outlawry, ih,\ [serving In 
an army must be maintained by the public, 656-7;] see Manufactures. 

[Aj, originally a pound of copper, 26; reduced to /j, 27; always a copper coin, 
39; reduced at end of ist Punic war, 883-4.] 

[Ascetic morality taught as moral philosophy, 726.] 

Asdrubal, his army greatly improved by discipline, 663-4; [the younger], how de- 
feated, 664, 

[Asinius Celer gave large price for a surmullet, 219.] 

Assembly, houses of, in the British colonies, the constitutional freedom of, 
shewn, 551-2. 

Assiento contract, 703. 

[Assize of bread, 142.] 

Assize of bread and ale, remarks on that statute, 178, 183. 

[Athens, large fees of teachers at, 133; artisans were slaves, 648; paid soldiers 
of, 657.] 

[Atlantic, 589, 591.] 

[Augmentation of coin defined, 885.] 

Augustus, emperor, emancipates the slaves of Vedius Pollio, for his cruelty, 554. 
'Aulnagers, 25.] 

Austere morality favoured by the common people, 746.] 

Austria, little assisted by the Danube, 21; noilitia defeated by the Swiss, 666; 

survey for land tax, 887.] 

[Ayr Bank, history of, 297-8.] 

[Ayrshire, rise of demand for labour in, 76.] 

[Azores, 525.] 

[Babylon, 365.] 

[Bahamas, 526.] 

[Bakers, incorporation of, in Scotland, 143.] 

[Balance of employments, 489,] 

Balance of annual produce and consumption explained, 464; may be in favour 
of a nation, when the balance of trade is against it, 464-5. 

Balance of trade, [absurd speculations concerning, 357;] no certain criterion to 
determine on which side it turns between two countries, 442; the current 
doctrine of, on which most regulations of trade are founded, absurd, 456; if 
even, by the exchange of their native commodities, both sides may be gain- 
ers, i}),\ how the balance would stand, if native commodities on one side, 
were paid with foreign commodities on the other, 456-7; how the balance 
stands when commodities are purchased with gold and silver, 457-8; the 
ruin of countries often predicted from the doctrine of an unfavourable 
balance of trade, 463. 

[Balboa, Nugnes de, 529.] 

[Baltic, 21; wood from, 163; flax and hemp, 346; tobacco to, 569; manufactures 
for, 591.] 

Banks [sometimes pay in sixpences to gain time, 44, 304; private, in London 
allow no interest but in Edinburgh give 4 per cent, on notes, 90; Scotch 
banking, 281-302;] great increase of trade in Scotland, since the establish- 
ment of them in the principal towns, 281; their usual course of business, 
282; consequences of their issuing too much paper, 285; necessary caution 
for some time observed by them with regard to giving credit to their cus- 
tomers, 289; limits of the advances they may prudently make to traders, 
291; how injured by the practice of drawing and redrawing bills, 295; his- 
tory of the Ayr bank, 297-9; history of the bank of England, 302-3; the 
nature and public advantage of banks considered, 304, 305; bankers might 
carry on their business with less paper, 307, 308; effects of the optional 



912 INDEX 

clauses in the Scots notes, 309; origin of their establishment, 447; bank 
money explained, ih. 

Of England, the conduct of, in regard to the coinage, 519; [those of Edin- 
burgh have no exclusive privilege, 714;] joint stock companies why well 
adapted to the trade of banking, 714, 715; a doubtful question whether the 
government of Great Britain is equal to the management of the bank to 
profit, 770. 

Bankers, the credit of their notes how established, 277; the nature of the banking 
business explained, 277, 282; the multiplication and competition of bankers 
under proper regulation, of service to public credit, 313. 

[Bank of Amsterdam, see Amsterdam.] 

[Bank of England, had to coin much gold, 286, 287; discounts, 295; history, 
302-4.] 

[Large capital, 700; enables government to contract unfunded debt, 
863-4; stopped usual business during the recoinage, ^*6.; advances the 
proceeds of taxes, 865; taxes first mortgaged in perpetuity for its advance, 
866; advances at January 1775, 875.] 

Bank of Scotland, 281.] 

Bank, the Royal, 281.] 

Bank-money, of greater value than currency, 445; explained, 447.] 

Bank notes, not below £10 in London, 306, 307; should not be for less than £5, 

307*] 

[Bankruptcy most frequent in hazardous trades, in; greatest and most humili- 
ating misfortune, 325.] 

[Bar, 856.] 

[Barbadoes, early prosperity, 564; all cultivated, 895.] 

[Barbary, 380; 697.] 

Baretti, Mr., ids account of the quantity of Portugal gold sent weekly to Eng- 
land, 513-4. 

Barons, feudal, their power contracted, by the grant of municipal privileges, 376; 
their extensive authority, 386, 387; how they lost their authority over their 
vassals, 388-9; and the power to disturb their country, 390-1; [influence of, 
752-3; revenue spent on luxuries, 755.] 

Barter, the exchange of one commodity for another, the propensity to, of ex- 
tensive operation, and peculiar to man, 13; is not sufiQcient to carry on the 
mutual intercourse of mankind, 22; [ceases on the introduction of money, 
32;] see Commerce. 

[Basel, chief revenue from export duty, 802.] 

Batavia, causes of the prosperity of the Dutch settlement there, 599-600. 

Bath Road inn, fallen fortune of, 330.] 

Bavaria, Danube no use to, 21,] 

Bayonne treated as foreign to France, 852.] 

Bazinghen, Abot de, quoted, 518.] 

Beaumont, J. L. Moreau de, see M6moires.] 

Beaver skins, review of the policy used in the trade for, 623; [subject to export 
duty, 832.] 

[Becket used clean hay, 385.] 

Beef, cheaj>er now in London, than in the reign of James I., 151; compared with 
the prices of wheat at the corresponding times, 15 1, 152; [compared with 
pork in France and England, 225-6.] 

[Beggar, alone depends on benevolence, 14; once synonymous with scholar, 132.] 
Benefices, ecclesiastical, the tenure of, why rendered secure, 750; the power of 
collating to, how taken from the Pope, in England and France, 756; general 
equality of, among the Presbyterians, 761; good effects of this equality, 762. 
[Benefit of clergy, 754.] 

[Benevolence, does not give us our dinner, 14,] 

Bengal, to what circumstance its early improvement in agriculture and manu- 
factures was owing, 20; present miserable state of the country, 73; remarks 
on the high rates of interest there, 94; [profits eat up rent and leave only 



INDEX 913 

subsistence for wages, 94, 97; piece goods exports, 205; ratio of gold to 
silver, 210-1.] 

[Improper regulations turned dearth into famine, 493;] oppressive con* 
duct of the English there to suit their trade in opium, 601; [revenue from 
land rent, 601-2;] why more remarkable for the exportation of manufactures 
than of grain, 647; [ancient land tax, 789, 791; good roads, 789.] 

[Bengal, Gulf of, favourable to commerce, 21.] 

[Benguela, 525, 599.] 

Berne, [farmers equal to the English, 371;] brief history of the republick of, 37S. 

Establishment of the reformation there, 758; application of the revenue of 
the Catholic clergy, 765; derives a revenue from the interest of its treasure, 
772; [tax on alienation, 811; only state which has a treasure, 861.] 

Bernier, Francois, quoted, 688.] 

Bettering one’s condition, universal desire of, 324, 326, 329, 508, 632.] 

Bible commonly read in Latin, 721-2.] 

Bills of exchange, [discounting of, chief means of issuing bdnk notes, 282;] punc- 
tuality in the payment of, how secured, 293-4; the pernicious practice of 
drawing and redrawing explained, 294; the arts made use of to disguise this 
mutual traffic in bills, 296. 

[Billets d^Uat^ sometimes at 60 or 70 per cent, discount, 864.] 

[Birch, Dr. Thomas, quoted, 151.] 

[Birmingham produces articles of fashion and fancy, 115; manufactures not 
within the statute of apprenticeship, 120-1; uses £50,000 in gold and silver 
annually, 207, 209; reduction in price of goods, 243; manufactures grew up 
naturally, 383; hardware exchanged for wine, 848.] 

Birth, superiority of, how it confers respect and authority, 672. 

Bishops, the ancient mode of electing them, and how altered, 751-2, 756. 
[Blackstone, William, quoted, 35, 366.] 

[Blanc, Cape, 696.] 

Body, natural, and political, analogy between, 638. 

Bohemia, [serfs still exist in, 365; survey and valuation, 786, 787;] account of the 
tax there on the industry of artificers, 817. 

Bombay, 709.] 

Bordeaux, see Bourdeaux.] 

Borlase, quoted, 168.] 

Born, Ralph de, his feast, 178.] 

Borough, see Burghs.] 

Boston, high-paid free labour cheaper than slave, 81; less populous than Mexico 
or Lima, 535.] 

[Bouchaud, quoted, 810.] 

[Bounder, proprietor of Cornish tin mine, 170.] 

Bounties, why given in commerce, 418-9. ^ 

On exportation, the policy of granting them, considered, 472; on the ex- 
portation of corn, 473; this bounty imposes two taxes on the people, 475; 
evil tendency of this bounty, 480; the bounty only beneficial to the exporter 
and importer, 481; motives of the country gentlemen in granting the 
bounty, ih . ; a trade which requires a bounty, necessarily a losing trade, 483 ; 
[bounties on production, 483;] tonnage bounties to the fisheries considered, 
484; account of the white-herring fishery, 488; remarks on other bounties, 
ih.\ a review of the principles on which they are generally granted, 609; 
those granted on American produce founded on mistaken policy, 612; how 
they affect the consumer, 625-6; [public teachers receive a sort of, 733; 
bounty on corn worse than a tax on necessaries, 826; on articles formerly 
charged with export duties, 831; give rise to frauds, 833; abolition of, pro- 
posed, 836; deducted from customs revenue, 847.] 

Bounty on the exportation of corn, the tendency of this measure examined, 193; 
[196-9; and see Bounties.] 

[Bourbon, the house of, united by British acquisition of Gibraltar and Minorca, 
699.] 



914 INDEX 

Bourdeaux, why a town of great trade, 319; [memoir of the parliament of, as to 
French debt, 870.] 

[Brady, Robert, quoted, 374-1 

[Braganza, family of, 535 ] 

Brazil [aborigines had neither arts nor agriculture, 203; gold of, 351, 404, 458, 

^ Grew to be a powerful colony under neglect, 535; the Dutch invaders 
expelled by the Portugueze colonists, 536; computed number of inhabitants 
there, 536; [Portuguese settled in, ib.)[ the trade of the principal provinces 
oppressed by the Portu^eze, 542; [Portuguese Jews banished thither, 555.] 

Bread, its relative value with butcher's meat compared, 149, 151; [tax on, in 
Holland, 826; levied by licence, 829.] 

[Breslau, tax on the Bishop's land, 786.] 

Brewery, reasons for transferring the taxes on, to the malt, 839-40; [for private 
use, untaxed, 84^.] 

Bridges, how to be erected and maintained, 682; [originally maintained by six 
days' labour, 773.] 

[Bristol and the African Company, 697.] 

Britain, Great, evidences that labour is sufficiently paid for there, 74; the price 
of provisions nearly the same in most places, 74; great variations in the price 
of labour, 74, 75; vegetables imported from Flanders in the last century, 78; 
historical account of the alterations interest of money has undergone, 88, 89; 
double interest deemed a reasonable mercantile profit, 97; in what respects 
the carrying trade is advantageous to, 352; appears to enjoy more of the 
carrying trade of Europe, than it really has, 354; is the only country of 
Europe in which the obligation of purveyance is abolished, 370; its funds 
for the support of foreign wars inquired into, 410; why never likely to be 
much affected by the free importation of Irish cattle, 426-7; nor salt pro- 
visions, 427; could be little affected by the importation of foreign corn, ih.; 
the policy of the commercial restraints on the trade with France examined, 
441; the trade with France might be more advantageous to each country 
than that with any other, 462. 

Why one of the richest countries in Europe, while Spain and Portugal are 
among the poorest, 508-9; review of her American colonies, 538-42 ; the trade 
of her colonies, how regulated, 543-4; distinction between enumerated and 
non-enumerated commodities, explained, restrains manufactures in 
America, 547-8; indulgences granted to the colonies, 549; constitutional 
freedom of her colony government, 551; the sugar colonies of, worse gov- 
erned than those of France, 553; disadvantages resulting from retaining the 
exclusive trade of tobacco with Maryland and Virginia, 560-1; the naviga- 
tion act has increased the colony trade, at the expence of many other 
branches of foreign trade, 562; the advantage of the colony trade estimated, 
566; a gradual relaxation of the exclusive trade, recommended, 571-2; 
events which have concurred to prevent the ill' effects of the loss of the 
colony trade, 572-3; the natural good effects of the colony trade, more than 
counterbalance the bad effects of the monopoly, 574; to maintain a mono- 
poly, the principal end of the dominion assumed over the colonies, 5^; has 
derived nothing but loss from this dominion, 581; is perhaps the only state 
which has only increased its expences by extending its empire, 586; the con- 
stitution of, would have been completed by admitting of American repre- 
sentation, 589; review of the admmistration of the East India Company, 
602-6; the interest of the consumer sacrificed to that of the producer in 
raising an empire in America, 626; the annual revenue of, compared with its 
annual rents and interest of capital stock, 774; the land-tax of, considered, 
7^; tythes, 788; window tax, 797-8; stamp duties, 812, 815; poll taxes in the 
reign of William III., 819; the uniformity of taxation in, favourable to in- 
ternal trade, 851; the system of taxation in, compared with that in France, 
856; account of the unfunded debt of, 863-4; funded debt, 864; aggregate, 
and general funds, 867; sinking fund, 868; annuities for terms of years and 



INDEX 


915 

for lives, ih.] perpetual annuities the best transferrable stock, 87 1; the re- 
duction of the publick debts during peace, bears no proportion to their 
accumulation during war, 874; the trade with the tobacco colonies, how 
carried on, without the intervention of specie, 894; the trade with the sugar 
colonies explained, ihr, Ireland and America ought in justice to contribute 
toward the discharge of her public debts, 896; how the territorial acquisi- 
tions of the East India company might be rendered a source of revenue, 898; 
if no such assistance can be obtained, her only resource pointed out, ib, 
British Empire, Statcs-general of the, 886, 887; colonies provinces of, 899.] 
British Linen Company, 715.] 

’Brittany, taille on lands held by ignoble tenure, 805.] 

Bruges, commerce of, 396,] 

Brutus, lent money at 48 per cent., 94.] 

Buenos Ayres, price of oxen at, 14^ 186, 229.] 

Buffon, G, L. L., quoted, 226, 527.] 

Bullion, the money of the great mercantile republic, 41 1-2; see Gold and Silver. 
[Burcester (now Bicester), price of hides at, 231.] 

Burghs, free, the origin of, 375; to what circumstances they owed their corporate 
jurisdictions, 375-6; why admitted to send representatives to parliament, 
378-9; are allowed to protect refugees from the country, 379. 

[Burgundy, vineyards, 155; militia defeated by the Swiss, 666.] 

[Burman, quoted, 810.] 

Burn, Dr., his observations on the laws relating to the settlements of the poor 
[quoted, 77], I39j 
Butcher, brutal and odious business, 100. 

Butcher’s meat [progress of price of, 149; an insignificant part of the labourer’s 
subsistence, 187;] no where a necessary of life, 827. 

[Buttons, division of labour in making, 8.] 

[Byelaw, to limit competition, can be enacted by a corporation, 129; of boroughs, 
375. 377-] 

I Byron, Hon. John, quoted, 1S6.] 

[Cabbages, half the price they were forty years ago, 78.] 

[Cadiz, imports of bullion to, 208; exorbitant profits and profusion at, 578, 592; 

competition with South Sea Company, 704.] 

[Caesar’s army destroyed the republic, 667.] 

[Calcraft’s account, 876.] 

[Calcutta, land carriage to, 19; ratio of gold and silver at, 21 1; council, 606, 709.] 
Calvinists, origin of that sect, 759; their principles of church government, 760. 
Cameron, Mr., of Lochiel, exercised within thirty years since, a criminal juris- 
diction over his own tenants, 387. 

[Campus Martius, 658, 729.] 

Canada, the French colony there, long under the government of an exclusive 
company, 538; but improved speedily after the dissolution of the company, 

538. 

Canals, navigable, the advantages of, 147; how to be made and maintained, 682, 
that of Languedoc, the support of, how secured, 684; may be successfully 
managed by joint stock companies, 714. 

Canary islands, 525.] 

Candles, taxes on, 78; an instrument of trade, 825.] 

Cannae, battle of, 664.] 

Cantillon, Mr. [Richard,] remarks on his account of the earnings of the labouring 
poor, 68. 

[Canton, silver will buy more commodities at, than in London, 37; poverty in the 
neighbourhood of, 72.] 

Cape of Good Hope, [discovery of passage by, 416, 525, 557, 590;] causes of the 
prosperity of the Dutch settlement there, 599; [mentioned, 696.] 

[Cape Coast Castle, 698.] 

[Capet, Robert, 756.] 



9i6 index 

Capital, [manufacturer’s, 48, 49, 51; society’s, 94; in a trade, 108; of a grocer, 
112; of merchants, 158; employed in a mine, 165;] in trade, explained, and 
how employed, 262; distinguished into circulating and fixed capitals, 262-3; 
characteristic of fixed capitals, 265; the several kinds of fixed capitals 
specified, 265-6; characteristic of circulating capitals, and the several kinds 
of, 266; fixed capitals supported by those which are circulating, ib.; circu- 
lating capitals how supported, 267; intention of a fixed capital, 271; the 
expence of maintaining the fixed and circulating capitals illustrated, 272; 
money, as an article of circulating capital, considered, 273; money, no 
measure of capital, 276; what quantity of industry any capital can employ, 
279-80; capitals, how far they may be extended by paper credit, 290-1 ; must 
alwa)^ be replaced with profit by the annual produce of land and labour, 
316; the proportion between capital and revenue, regulates the proportion 
between industry and idleness, 320; how it is increased or diminished, 321; 
national evidences of the increase of, 326-7; in what instances private ex- 
pences contribute to enlarge the national capital, 329-30; the increase of, 
reduces profits by competition, 336; the difeerent ways of employing a 
capital, 341; how replaced to the different classes of traders, 343; that em- 
ployed in agriculture puts into motion a greater quantity of productive 
labour, than any equal capital employed in manufactures, 345; that of a 
manufacturer should reside within tihie country, 346; the operation of 
capitals employed in agriculture, manufactures, and foreign trade, com- 
pared, 346-7; the prosperity of a country depends on the due proportion of 
its capital applied to these three grand objects, 348; different returns of 
capitals employed in foreign trade, 350; is rather employed on agriculture 
than in trade and manufactures, on equal terms, 357-8; is rather employed 
in manufactures than in foreign trade, 359; the natural progress of the em- 
plo3^ent of, 360; acquired by trade, is very precarious until realized by the 
cultivation and improvement of land, 395; the employment of, in the differ- 
ent species of trade, how determined, 421; [industry proportioned to, 424.] 
[Distributed among inferior ranks annually, 838; and land, the two origi- 
nal sources of revenue, 879.] 

[Capital values, taxes on, 809-15.] 

Capitation taxes, the nature of, considered, 818-9; in England, 819; in France, 
820; [and see Poll taxes.] 

Carlisle, exchange between London and, 310.] 

'Carnatic, 707.] 

'Carneades, 134.] 

Carolina, planters both fanners and landlords, 159; plantation of, 564.] 

€arreri, Gemelli, see under Gemelli.] 

Carriage, land and water, compared, 18; water carriage contributes to improve 
arts and industry, in all countries where it can be used, 19, 147, 206; [ab- 
sence of cheap, causes settlement of finer manufactures, 382.] 

Carriage, Land, how facilitated and reduced in price, by public works, 683. 
[Carriage tax, 686.] 

[Carron, 76.] 

[Carrots reduced in price, 78,] 

Carrying trade, [defined, i. 278;] the nature and operation of, examined, 351; is 
the symptom, but not the cause, of national wealth, and hence points out 
the two richest countries in Europe, 354; trades may appear to be carrying 
trades, which are not so, ih.\ the disadvantages of, to individuals, 421; the 
Dutch, how excluded from being the carriers to Great Britain, 430; draw- 
backs of duties originally granted for the encouragement of, 470. 

[Carthage, mariners sailed beyond Gibraltar, 19-20; the fate of, great historical 
revolution, 663.] 

[Carthagena, 667, 704.] 

Carthaginian army, its superiority over the Roman army, accounted for, 664. 
[Cash account at Scotch banks explained, 282-3.] 

[Castile, 528.] 



INDEX 


917 


'Castracani, Castruccio, drove out manufactures from Lucca, 381.] 

'Casuistry taught as moral philosophy, 727.] 

^Catholics established Maryland, 555.] 

Cato, advised good feeding of cattle, 150; on communication of agricultural 
knowledge, 429.] 

Cattle, [at one time used as money, 23;] and corn, their value compared, in the 
different stages of agriculture, 148; the price of, reduced by artificial grasses, 
15 1 ; to what height the price of cattle may rise in an improving country, 
220; the raising a stock of, necessary for the supply of manure to farms, 221; 
cattle must bear a good price to be well fed, ih . ; the price of, rises in Scotland 
in consequence of the union with England, 222; great multiplication of 
European cattle in America, ih.\ are killed in some countries, merely for the 
sake of the hides and tallow, 229; the market for these articles more exten- 
sive than for the carcase, ib,; this market sometimes brought nearer home 
by the establishment of manufactures, ih.\ how the extension of cultivation 
raises the price of animal food, 241; [labouring, are a fixed capital, 263; im- 
portation prohibited, 394;] is perhaps the only commodity more expensive 
to transport by sea than by land, 426; Great Britain never likely to be much 
affected by the free importation of Irish cattle, ih. 

‘Ceded Islands, 545, 876, 895.] 

'Celebes, 600.] 

'Celtes cultivated music and dancing, 730.] 

Certificates, parish, the laws relating to, with observations on them, 138-9. 
[Chance of gain overvalued, 107.] 

[Charles V., remark on the abundance of France and poverty of Spain, 202; be- 
friended the Pope, 758.] 

Charles VI, surveyed Milan, 786.] 

Charles VIII., expedition to Naples, 394, 395.] 

Charles XII. of Sweden, 414.] 

Charlevoix, Francois, quoted, 538.] 

Chastity, in the liberal morality, 746.] 

'Chatham, Lord, his account, 876.] 

Child, Sir Josiah, [quoted, 693;] his observation on trading companies, 695-6. 
Children [value of, in North America, 70, 532;] riches unfavourable to the pro- 
duction, and extreme poverty to the raising, of them, 79; the mortality still 
greater among those maintained by charity, 79. 

[Chili, takes Spanish iron, 167; rent of gold mines, 171; price of horses in, 186; 
growth of towns of, 204; cattle killed for sake of hide and tallow, 229; con- 
quest of, 529, 556.] 

China, to what the early improvement in arts and industry there was owing, 20; 
concurrent testimonies of the misery of the lower ranks of the Chinese, 71, 
72; [one of the richest countries in the world, 71;] is not however a declining 
country, 73; [stationap?- population, 80; long stationary and as rich as pos- 
sible, 95;] high rate of interest of money there, 95; [country labourers higher 
paid than artificers, etc., 127; price of silver affected by price in Peru, 168; 
much richer than any part of Europe, 189, 238;] the price of labour there, 
lower than in the greater part of Europe, [189,] 206; [trade with, 204, 205;] 
great state assumed by the grandees, 205; [not much inferior to Europe in 
manufacturing, 206;] silver the most profitable article to send thither, ih.; 
the proportional value of gold to silver, how rated there, 211; [quantity of 
precious metals affected by the abundance of American mines, 236;] the 
value of gold and silver much higher there than in any part of Europe, 238; 
[wonderful accounts of wealth and cultivation, 348; never excelled in 
foreign commerce, ih,; wealthy without carrying on its own foreign trade 
360; without mines richer and better off than Mexico or Peru, 416; replace- 
ment of capital employed, 457; acquired wealth by agriculture and interior 
commerce, 462.] 

[Importance of the Cape and Batavia to the trade with Europe, 600;] 
agriculture favoured there, beyond manufactures, 644; foreign trade not 



INDEX 

favoured there, 6445 extension of the home-market, ib,) great attention paid 
to the roads there, 687; [land tax the principal source of revenue, 688;] in 
what the principal revenue of the sovereign consists, *7895 [consequent 
goodness of roads and canals, tb,;] the revenue of, partly raised in kind, 790; 
[silk, 837.] 

'Chocolate, a luxury of the poorest Spaniards, 823; duty on, 837.] 

'Choiseul, Duke of, managed the parliament of Paris, 751 ] 

Christianity established by law, 722 ] 

[Christiern II., Reformation in Sweden assisted by his tyranny, 758 ] 

* Church, [of England not successful in resisting enthusiasts, 741; loyal, 759; 
drains the universities, 763;] the richer the church, the poorer the state, 765; 
amount of the revenue of the church of Scotland, 765; the revenue of the 
church heavier taxed in Prussia, than lay proprietors, 786; the nature and 
effect of tythes considered, 7S8 
Cibao, 526.] 

Cicero, quoted, 94, 150, 827.] 

Cipango, 526.] _ 

Circulation, the dangerous practice of raising money by, explamed, 294; in 
traffic, the two different branches of, considered, 306. 

Cities, circumstances which contributed to their opulence, 379; those of Italy 
the first that rose to consequence, 380; the commerce and manufactures of, 
have occasioned the improvement and cultivation of the country, 392. 
Clergy, a supply of, provided for, by public and private foundations for their 
education, 130,* curates worse paid than many mechanics, 13 1. 

[Of North American colonies, not numerous, and maintained by volun- 
tary contributions, 541; greatest engrossers of land in colonies of Spain, 
Portugal and France, ^6.]; of an established religion, why unsuccessful 
against the teachers of a new religion, 741; why they persecute their adver- 
saries, id.; the zeal of the inferior clergy of the church o£ Rome, how kept 
alive, ib.; utility of ecclesiastical establishments, 743; how connected with 
the civil magistrate, 744; unsafe for the civil magistrate to differ with them, 
749 j must be managed without violence, 750; of the church of Rome, one 
great army cantoned over Europe, 752; their power similar to that of the 
temporal barons, during the feudal monkish ages, ib.; how the power of the 
Romish clergy declined, 755; evils attending allowing parishes to elect their 
own ministers, 760. 

Cloathing, more plentiful than food, in uncultivated countries, 16 1; the mate- 
rials for, the first articles rude nations have to offer, 162. 

Coach, a man not rich because he keeps a, 76.] 

Coach and six not effectually demanded by a very poor man, 56.] 

^Coach-tax better levied as an annuity than as a lump sum, 827.] 

Coal, must generally be cheaper than wood to gain the preference for fuel, 165; 
the price of, how reduced, 166-7; fhe exportation of, subjected to a duty 
higher than the prime cost of, at the pit, 623; the cheapest of all fuel, 825; 
[manufactures confined to coal countries in Great Britain, tb.;] the tax on 
[seaborne], absurdly regulated, tb. 

Coal mines, their different degrees of fertility, 165; when fertile, are sometimes 
unprofitable by situation, 165, 167; the proportion of rent generally paid 
for, 167; the machinery necessary to, expensive, 263. 

Coal trade from Newcastle to London, employs more shipping than all the othei 
carryi^ trade of England, 352. 

Cochin China, remarks on the principal articles of cultivation there, 156-7. 
[Cockfighting has ruined many, 859.] 

[Cod used as money, 23.] 

Coin, stamped, the origin, and peculiar advantages of, in commerce, 25; the 
different species of, in different ages and countries, 26; causes of the alter- 
ations in the value of, 27, 32, 34; how the standard coin of different nations 
came to be of different metals, 38-9; a reform in the English coinage sug- 
gested, 44-s; [gold and silver had the qualities which gave them value before 



INDEX 


919 

they were coined, 172;] silver, consequences attending the debasement of, 
194; [amount of Scotch, 212-3; amount of British, 410;] coinage of France 
and Britain, examined, 444. 

Why coin is privately melted down, 516, 517; the mint chiefly employed 
to keep up the quantity thus diminished, 517; a duty to pay the coinage 
would preserve money from being melted or counterfeited, 517, 518; stan- 
dard of the gold coin in France, 518; how a seignorage on coin would oper- 
ate, ib.', a tax upon coinage is advanced by every body, and :^ally paid by 
nobody, 520, 521; a revenue lost, by government defraying the expence of 
coinage, 521; amount of the annual coinage before the late reformation of 
the gold coin, ib.; the law for the encouragement of, founded on prejudice, 
522; consequences of raising the denomination of, as an expedient to facili- 
tate pa)nnent of public debts, 882; adulteration of, 883. 

Colbert, M., the policy of his commercial regulations disputed, 434, 628; his 
character, 627-8. 

Colleges, cause of the depreciation of their money rents inquired into, 35; the 
endowments of, from whence they generally arise, 716; whether they have 
in general answered the puiposes of their institution, ib.; these endowments 
have diminished the necessity of application in the teachers, 717; the privi- 
leges of graduates by residence, and charitable foundation of scholarships, 
injurious to collegiate education, 719; discipline of, 720. 

Colliers and coal-heavers, their high earnings accounted for, 104. 

[Coloni Partiarii or Metayers, 366.] 

[Colonia signifies a plantation, 525.] 

Colonies, new, the natural progress of, 92; [restrictions on hatters’ apprentices 
in the English, 119; planters in British, usually farmers as well as landlords, 
X59; paper currency of British, 311; slave cultivation in British, 365-6;] 
modern, the commercial advantages derived from them, 419. 

Ancient, on what principles founded, 523; ancient Grecian colonies not 
retained under subjection to the parent states, ih.; [Roman colonies, 524-5;] 
distinction between the Roman and Greek colonies, ib,\ circumstances that 
led to the establishment of European colonies in the East Indies and 
America, 525; the East Indies discovered by Vasco de Gama, 526; the West 
Indies discovered by Columbus, ih,) gold the object of the first Spanish 
enterprises there, 529; and of those of all other European nations, 531; 
causes of the prosperity of new colonies, 531 [-56]; rapid progress of the 
ancient Greek colonies, 533; the Roman colonies slow in improvement, ib.; 
the remoteness of America and the West Indies, greatly in favour of the 
European colonies there, 533; review of the British American colonies, 538; 
expence of the civil establishments in British America, 540; ecclesiastical 
government, 541; general view of the restraints laid upon the trade of the 
European colonies, 541; the trade of the British colonies, how regulated, 
543-4; the different kinds of non-enumcrated commodities specified, ib.; 
enumerated commodities, 546; restraints upon their manufactures, 547-8; 
indulgences granted them by Britam, 550; were free in every other respect 
except as to their foreign trade, 551; little credit due to the policy of Europe 
from the success of the colonies, 555; throve by the disorder and injustice of 
the European governments, 555; have contributed to augment the industry 
of all the countries of Europe, 557; exclusive privileges of trade, a dead 
weight upon all these exertions both in Europe and America, 558; have in 
general been a source of expence instead of revenue to their mother coun- 
tries, 560; have only benefited their mother countries by the exclusive trade 
carried on with them, 560; consequences of the navigation act, 562; the 
advantage of the colony trade to Britain estimated, 566; a gradual relaxa- 
tion of the exclusive commerce recommended, 571-2; events which have pre- 
vented Britain from sensibly feeling the loss of the colony trade, 572-3; the 
effects of the colony trade, and the monopoly of that trade, distinguished, 
574; to maintain a monopoly, the principal end of the dominion Great 
Britain assumes over the colonies, 580; amount of the ordinary peace estab 



920 INDEX 

lishment of, ih.; the two late wars Britain sustained, colony wars, to support 
a monopoly, 581; two modes by which they might be taxed, 583; their 
assemblies not likely to tax them, ib.; taxes by parhamentary requisition, as 
little likely to be raised, 584; representatives of, might be admitted into the 
British parliament with good effect, 586; answer to objections against 
American representation, 589; the interest of the cons^er in Britain, 
sacrificed to that of the producer, in raising an empire in America, 626; 
[should contribute to the revenue or be cut off, 900.] 

Coliunbus, the motive that led to his discovery of America, 526; why he gave the 
names of Indies to the islands he discovered, 526-7; his triumphal exhibition 
of their productions, 528. 

Columela,his instruction for fencing a kitchen-garden, 153; advises the planting 
of vineyards, 154; [quoted, 224, 365.] 

Combination among masters easier than among workmen and not prohibited 
by law, 66.] ^ 

Commerce, the different common standards or mediums made use of to facilitate 
the exchange of commodities, in the early stages of, 23; origin of money, ib.; 
definition of the term valuej 28. 

Treaties of, though advantageous to the merchants and manufacturers of 
the favoured country, necessarily disadvantageous to those of the favouring 
country, 5rr; translation of the commercial treaty between England and 
Portugal concluded in 1703 by Mr. Methuen, 512-3; restraints laid upon 
the European colonies in America, 541; the present splendor of the mercan- 
tile system, owing to the discovery and colonization of America, 590; review 
of the plan by which it proposes to enrich a country, 6o7[-626]; the interest 
of the consumer constantly sacrificed to that of the producer, 625; see Agri- 
culture, Banks, Capital, Manufactures, Merchant, Money, Stock, Trade, 
&c. 

Commodities, the barter of, insufEcient for the mutual supply of the wants of 
mankind, 22; metals found to be the best medium to facilitate the exchange 
of, 23; labour an invariable standard for the value of, 33; real and nominal 
prices of, distinguished, ib.; the component parts of the prices of, explained 
and illustrated, 49-50; the natural, and market prices of, distmguished, and 
how regiilated, 55; the ordinary proportion between the value of any two 
commodities, not necessarily the same as between the quantities of them 
commonly in the market, 212; the price of rude produce, how affected by 
the advance of wealth and improvement, 217; foreign, are primarily pur- 
chased with the produce of domestic industry, 349; when advantageously 
exported in a rude state, even by a foreign capital, 359-60; the quantity of, 
in every country, naturally regulated by the demand, 404; wealth in goods, 
and in money, compared, 406; exportation of, to a proper market, always 
attended with more profit, than that of gold and silver, 41 1; the natural ad- 
vantages of countries in particular productions, sometimes not possible to 
struggle against, 425. 

[Commons, the House of, not a very equal representation of the people, 551; un- 
trustworthy reports of debates in, 697.] 

Company, [government of an exclusive, the worst of all governments, 537; most 
effectual expedient for stopping growth of a colony, 542;] mercantile, in- 
capable of consulting their true interests when they become sovereigns, 
601-2; an exclusive company, a public nuisance, 606; trading, how first 
formed, 691; regidated, and joint stock companies, distinguished, 691-2; 
regulated companies in Great Britain, specified, 692; are useless, 693; the 
constant view of such companies, 695; forts and garrisons, why never main- 
tained by regulated companies, ib.; the nature of joint stock companies 
explained, 699, 712; [seldom successful without an exclusive privilege, 700; 
account of several companies, 700-11;] a monopoly necessary to enable a 
joint stock company to carry on a foreign trade, 712; [Morellet's list of 
fifty-five failures, 713;] what kind of joint stock companies need no exclu- 
sive privileges, ib.; joint stock companies, why well adapted to the trade of 



INDEX 


921 

banking, ib.; the trade of insurance may be carried on successfully by a 
[joint] stock company, 714; also inland navigations, and the supply of water 
to a great city, ib.; ill success of joint stock companies in other undertakings, 
715 - 

Competition, the effect of, in the purchase of commodities, 56; among the 
venders, 57, 87; [restraint of, causes inequalities of wages and profits, 118, 
129; the only cause of good management, 147; of shopkeepers, cannot hurt 
the producer or the consumer, 343.] 

[Compi^gne, 319.] 

[Conceit, men’s overweening, often noticed, 107.] 

Concordat, in France, its object, 756. 

[Condom, 805.] 

[Congo, 525, 599 -] 

Congress, American, its strength owing to the important characters it confers on 
the members of it, 587. 

Connecticut, esspense of, 540; governor elected by the assembly, 852.] 
Considerations on the Trade and Finances of Great Britain^ quoted, 875.] 
Constantine, 665.] 

Constantinople, 750.] 

'Consumable goods, taxes on, finally paid by the consumer at convenient time, 
778; paid indifferently from the three kinds of revenue, 810; incidence of, &c., 
821-58.] 

[Consumption the sole end of production, 625.] 

[Contrdle, the, French stamp duties on registration, 814.] 

Conversion price, in the payment of rents in Scotland, explained, 181. 
[Copartnery, difference between it and a joint-stock company, 699.] 
[Copenhagen, 320.] 

Copper, [Romans used unstamped bars of, as money, 24;] the standard measure 
of value among the ancient Romans, 39; is no legal tender in England, ib.; 
[rated above its value in the English coinage, 43; not legal tender for more 
than a shilling, 44.] 

[Copyholders, 805.] 

[Copyright, a monopoly granted to an author, 712.] 

Cori, the largest quadruped on the island of St. Domingo, described, 527. 
Corn, the raising of, in different countries, not subject to the same degree of 
rivalship as manufactures, 6 ; is the best standard for reserved rents, 34; the 
price of, how regulated [varies more from year to year than silver], 36; the 
price of, the best standard for comparing the different values of particular 
commodities at different times and places, 38; the three component parts in 
the price of, 50; is dearer in Scotland than in England, 75; [corn-field pro- 
duces more food than pasture of equal extent, 148;] its value compared with 
that of butchers meat, in the different periods of agriculture, 148, 152; com- 
pared with silver, 176-8; circumstances in a historical view of the prices of 
corn, that have misled writers in treating of the value of silver at different 
periods, 181; [at all stages of improvement costs the price of nearly equal 
quantities of labour, 186-7;] is always a more accurate measure of value, 
than any other commodity, ib.; why dearer in great towns than in the 
country, 190; why dearer in some rich commercial countries, as Holland and 
Genoa, ib.; rose in its nominal price on the discovery of the American 
mines, 191 ; and in consequence of the civil war under king Charles I., 192-3; 
and in consequence of the bounty on the exportation of, ib.; tendency of the 
bounty examined, 196-7; [recent high price due to bad seasons, 198;] 
chronological table of the prices of, 251-8; the least profitable article of 
growth in the British West Indian colonies, 366; the restraints formerly laid 
upon the trade of, unfavourable to the cultivation of land, 371-2; [bounty on 
exportation and duties on importation, 394;] the free importation of, could 
little affect the farmers of Great Britain, 428. 

The policy of the bounty on the exportation of, examined, 473; the reduc- 
tion in the price of corn, not produced by the bounty, 474; tillage not en- 



922 INDEX 

couraged by the bounty, 474-6; the money price of, regulates that of all 
other home-made commodities, 477; illustration, 478; ill effects of the 
bounty, 480-1; motives of the country gentlemen in granting the bounty, 
481; the natural value of corn not to be altered by altering the money price, 
482; the four several branches of the corn trade specified, 490; the inland 
dealer, for his own interest will not raise the price of corn higher than the 
scarcity of the season requires, ih.\ corn a commodity the least liable to be 
monopolized, 492; the inland dealers in corn too numerous and dispersed to 
form a general combination, 492; dearths never artificial, but when govern- 
ment interferes improperly to prevent them, ih.' the freedom of the corn 
trade, the best security against a famine, 493; old English statute to pro- 
hibit the com trade, 494; consequences of farmers being forced to become 
corn dealers, 495; the use of corn dealers to the farmers, 498; the prohibitory 
statute against the corn trade softened, 499; but still under the influence of 
popular prejudices, ih.\ the average quantity of corn imported and exported, 
compared with the consumption and annual produce, 501; tendency of a 
free importation of corn, 501-2; the home market the most important one 
for com, 502; duties payable on the importation of grain, before 13 Geo. 
III., 503, note‘j the impropriety of the statute 22 Car. II. for regulating the 
importation of wheat, confessed by the suspension of its execution, by 
temporary statutes, 504; the home-market indirectly supplied by the ex- 
portation of com, ih.] how a liberal system of free exportation and importa- 
tion, among all nations, would operate, 506; the laws concerning corn, simi- 
lar to those relating to religion, 507; the home-market supplied by the 
cariying trade, ih.\ the system of laws connected with the establishment of 
the bounty, undeserving of praise, ih,\ remarks on the statute 13 Geo. III., 
509; [restrictions on French com trade removed, 642-3; bounty on corn 
worse than a tax on necessaries, 826.] 

[Com, Essay on the Legislation and Commerce ofy quoted, 856.] 

[Cornwall, 168-70.] 

Corporations, tendency of the exclusive privileges of, on trade, 61, 1 19; by what 
authority erected, 123-4; the advantages corporations derive from the sur- 
rounding country, 124; check the operations of competition, 127; their 
internal regulations, combinations against the public, 128; are injurious, 
even to the members of them, 129; the laws of, obstmet the free circulation 
of labour, from one employment to another, 135; the origin of, 375; are 
exempted by their privileges from the power of the feudal barons, 376; the 
European East India Companies disadvantageous to the eastern commerce, 
417; the exclusive privileges of corporations ought to be destroyed, 437. 
Cortez, 529.] 

Corv6e, a principal instrument of tyranny, 689.] 

Cossacks, treasures of their chief, 414.] 

Cost, real, defined, 55.] 

Cottagers, in Scotland, their situation described, 116; arc cheap manufacturers 
of stockings, 117; the diminution of, in England, considered, 226. 

[Cotton, most valuable vegetable production of the West Indies, 527; bales of, 
exhibited by Columbus, 528.] 

Gotten manufacture not practised in Europe in 1492, 527-8.] 

Country, the charms of, attract capital, 358.] 

Country gentlemen, imposed on by the arguments of merchants, 402; imitated 
manufacturers, 429.] 

[Courts, see Justice.] 

Coward, character of, 739. 

Credit, [of a person does not depend on his trade, 105; might supply the place of 
money, 405;] see Paper-money. 

Creoles, 535, 536.] 

Cromwell, 563, 667.] 

Crown lands should be sold, 776.] 

Crusades to the Holy Land, favourable to the revival of commerce, 380. 



INDEX 


923 


Cruttenden East Indiaman, 708 ] 

Cuba, 168, 556.] 

Cura^oa, 537.] 

Curate, 130.] 

Currency of states, remarks on, 446. 

[Custom-house books untrustworthy, 442.] 

Customs, the motives and tendency of drawbacks from the duties of, 466; the 
revenue of the^ customs increased, by drawbacks, 470; occasion of first im- 
posing the duties of, 69 r; origin of those duties, 829; three ancient branches 
of, 830; drawbacks of, 831; are regulated according to the mercantile sys- 
tem, 832; frauds practised to obtain drawbacks and bounties, the duties 
of, in many instances, uncertain, 834; improvement of, suggested, 834; 
computation of the expence of collecting them, 847. 

[Cyder, tax on, 840.] 

[Cyprus, 94.] 

[Daedalian wings of paper money, 305.] 

Dairy, the business of, generally carried on as a save-all, 226; circumstances which 
impede or promote the attention to it, 226-7; English and Scotch dairies, ib. 
[Daniel, Gabriel, quoted, 377.] 

[Dantzig, 190, 443.] ^ 

Danube, the navigation of that river why of little use to the interior parts of the 
country from whence it flows, 21. 

[Darien, 527.] 

[Dauphin6, 805.] 

Davenant, Dr., [quoted, 77;] his objections to the transferring the duties on beer 
to the malt, considered, 842. 

[Dear years enable masters to make better bargains with servants, 83.] 
Dearths, never caused by combinations among the dealers in corn, but by some 
general calamity, 492; the free exercise of the corn trade the best palliative 
against the inconveniences of a dearth, 499; com dealers the best friends to 
* the people at such seasons, 500. 

[Debasement of coinage practised ever3rwhere, 27.] 

Debts, public, [efltect of, on annual produce, to be treated in fi[fth book, lx; paid 
by debasing the coin, 27 ] 

[Not the cause of British prosperity, 508; interest on, not subject to the 
land tax, 774;] the origin of, traced, 861; are accelerated by the expences at- 
tending war, 861; account of the unfunded debt of Great Britain, 864; the 
funded debt, 864-5; aggregate and general funds, 867; sinking fund, 868, 
873; annuities for terms of years, and for lives, 868; the reduction of, during 
peace, bears no proportion to its accumulation during war, 873-4; the plea 
of the interest being no burden to the nation, considered, 879; are seldom 
fairly paid when accumulated to a certain degree, 882; might easily be dis- 
charged, by extending the British system of taxation over all the provinces 
of the empire, 886; Ireland and America ought to contribute to discharge 
the public debts of Britain, 896. 

Decker, Sir Matthew, [quoted, 480, 563;] his observation on the accumulation of 
taxes, 824; his proposal for transferring all taxes to the consumer, by annual 
payments, considered, 828; [quoted, 889.] 

[Defence much more important than opulence, 431.] 

|De Lange, quoted, 644.] 

Demand, [difference between absolute and effective, 56; regulates multiplication 
of human species, 80;] though the increase of, may at first raise the price of 
goods, it never fails to reduce it afterward, 706. 

[Democritus, quoted, 153.] 

[Denisart, quoted, 90.] 

Denmark [has advanced considerably in agriculture and manufactures, 202;East 
India trade began in i8th century, 204; James I.’s bed came from, 330; East 
India trade under an exclusive company, 417.] 



924 


INDEX 


[No gold, silver or diamond mines in colonies of, 531; attempts at settle- 
ment in America in 17th century, 536;] account of the settlements of, in the 
West Indies, 537; [stunted colonies with rule of exclusive company, 542; 
without an exclusive company would never have sent a ship to East Indies, 
596; would have lost nothing thereby, 597; excluded from Eastland Com- 
pany’s monopoly, 693; Reformation in, 758; levies transit duty on the 
Sound, 846.] 

[^Dlpenses annuelles,’ ‘foncites’ and 'primitives’ distinguished, 629.] 
[Dercyllidas, quoted, 414.] 

[Desert (Sahara), 525.] 

Diamonds, the mines of, not always worth working for, 172-3; power in price in 
India than in Europe, 205-6.] 

Didactron of Isocrates, 133.] 

Dignity of the sovereign, expense of, 766.] 

Diocletian, 665.] 

Diogenes sent on an embassy, 134.] 

Diomede, his armour cost nine oxen, 23.] 

Dion Cassius, quoted, 810.] 

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, quoted, 732.] 

Directors of companies inefficient managers, 700.] ^ 

Discipline, the great importance of, in war, 661-2; instances, 663 &c. 

Diseases, peculiar, of different trades, 82.] 

Dissenters, learned but not so popular as methodists, 741.] 

Distribution, subject of part of first book, Iviii, 3; prices and produce distributed 
between wages, profit and rent, 52, 248; of wealth more unequal in France 
than America, 463.] 

Diversions, public, their political use, 748. 

[Division of labour, 3-22; gives occasion to exchange and money, 22, 28; in the 
original state of things would have augmented wages, 64; is promoted by the 
interest of owners of stock, 86; in metal and woollen manufactures, 243-4; 
relation to exchange, 259; advantageous to all the persons employed, 356; 
promoted by foreign trade, 415, 416; in the trade of war must be introduced 
by the state, 659; encouraged by increase of demand, 706.] 

Dobbs, Mr., quoted, 702,] 

Dog never exchanges, 13.] 

Domaine, source of French revenue, 855,] 

Donaingo, St. [mines of, 168;] mistaken by Columbus for a part of the East 
Indies, 526; its principal productions, ib.; the natives soon stripped of all 
their gold, 528-9; historical view of the French colony there, 538. 
[Dominica a new field for speculation, 895.] 

[Dominicans revived languishing faith, 742.] 

Doomsday book, [mentions annual poll taxes paid by towns, 374;] the intention 
of that compilation, 786. 

Dorians, ancient, where the colonies of, settled, 523. 

[Douglass, Dr., quoted, 158, 310.] 

[Draco, 612.] 

Dramatic exhibitions, the political use of, 748. 

Drawbacks, in commerce, explained, 418-9. 

The motives to, and tendency of, explained, 466; on wines, currants, and 
wrought silks, 467; on tobacco and sugar, ih., on wines, particularly con- 
sidered, 468; were originally granted to encourage the carrying trade, 470; 
the revenue of the customs increased by them, 470; drawbacks allowed in 
favour of the colonies, 550; [given on certain articles formerly subject to 
export duties, 831; give rise to fraud, 833; which might be prevented, 836; 
deductions from customs revenue, 847.] 

Drugs, regulations of their importation and exportation, 622. 

[Drummond, Mr., his notes for guineas, 41.] 

Drunkenness, the motive to this vice inquired into, 459-60; [condoned by liberal 
morality, 746.] 



INDEX 


92s 


Du Cange, quoted, 885.] 

Dumfries, 310.] 

Dunfermline, 330.] 

Dunkirk treated as foreign by France, 852.] 

Dupleix, 707.] 

Dutch, their settlements in America slow in improvement because under the 
government of an exclusive company, 537; their East India trade checked 
by monopoly, 596; measures taken by, to secure the monopoly of the spice 
trade, 600; see Holland. 

[Du Tot, quoted, 302.] 

[Du Verney, quoted, 302, 864.] 

East India, [native governments did not encourage foreign commerce, but de- 
rived opulence from inland navigation, 20; shells used as money, 23;] repre- 
sentation of the miserable state of the provinces of, under the English gov- 
ernment there, 73; [great fortunes easily acquired there, 94; market for 
American silver, 204;] historical view of the European trade with those 
countries, ihr, rice countries more populous and rich than corn countries, 
205 ; the real price of labour lower in China and Indostan, than in the greater 
part of Europe, 206; gold and silver the most profitable commodities to 
carry thither, ih.\ the proportional value of gold to silver, how rated there, 
21 1 ; [trade of, to Europe, a roundabout trade of consumption, 354; expense 
of last French war laid out there, 410, 581 ; richer and better cultivated than 
Mexico and Peru, 416; commerce with, less advantage to Europe than that 
with America, 417;] great extension of foreign commerce by the discovery 
of a passage to, round the cape of (rood Hope, 416; historical review of the 
intercourse with, ^17; effect of the annual exportation of silver to, from 
Europe, ib.'j [re-exportation of goods from, brings back gold and silver, 442; 
goods mentioned, 457, 525, 527.] 

[Drawbacks on exportation of goods from, to America, 470, 550; Columbus 
tried to find a western passage to, 526, 531; origin of the name, 327; north- 
west passage to, 531; Dutch settlements under an exclusive company, 537; 
advantages to Europe of the Cape passage, 557, 595-606; its discovery one 
of the two most important events in history, 590; countries which trade 
directly with, enjoy the show, 591; mercantile regulations concerning trade 
with, derange the natural distribution of stock more than others, 595;] the 
trade with, chiefly carried on by exclusive companies, ih.] tendency of their 
monopolies, 596; [poor countries should not trade with, 596-9; no colonies 
there thriving like the American, 599; the Cape the halfway house, 600; see 
Indostan, and East India Company.] 

East India Company, [oppresses and domineers, 73; servants' profits eat up rent, 
97; import tea worth £1,500,000, 205; tea dearer than that of Dutch and 
Gottenburg companies, 405; envy of its privileges and consequent argu- 
ments as to the trade carried on, 417.] 

[Restraints on the rice trade imposed by, caused a famine, 493;] a mono- 
poly against the very nation in which it is erected, 595; the operation of such 
a company in a poor, and in a rich country, compared, 596; that country 
whose capital is not large enough to tend to such a distant trade ought not 
to engage in it, 598-9; the mercantile habits of trading companies render 
them incapable of consulting their true interests when they become sover- 
eigns, 601-2; [their interest as sovereigns that European imports should be 
sold cheap and Indian exports dear, and the reverse as merchants, 603;] the 
genius of the administration of the English company, ^6.; subordinate prac- 
tices of their agents and clerks, 603-4; the bad conduct of agents^ in India 
owing to their situation, 605; such an exclusive company a nuisance in 
every respect, ih,\ [originally established to maintain forts, 690; exclusive 
privilege, 700;] brief review of their history, 704-[ii]; their privileges in^ 
vaded, 705; a rival company formed, ih.] the two companies united, 706-7; 
are infected by the spirit of war and conquest, 707; agreements between the 



926 


INDEX 

company and government, 707-8; interference of government in their terri- 
torial administration, 709; and in the direction at home, ib.\ why unfit to 
govern a great empire, 710; [may trade after expiration of exclusive privi- 
lege, 713;] their sovereign and commercial characters, incompatible, 771, 
[Bengal land tax before their domination, 789, 791; a modus converted into 
a payment in kind, 791; its advance to government, 866, 873-6;] how the 
territorial acquisitions of, might be rendered a source of revenue, 898. 
[East India Company, the Dutch, its tea cheaper than that of the English Com- 
pany, 405; maliciously injures the English, 705.]^ 

[East India Company, the French, established to maintain forts, 690 ] 

[East India Company, the Gottenburg, its tea cheaper than that of the English 
Company, 405.] 

[Eastland Company, history of, 692, 693.] 

[Ecclesiastical State, taxes on bread, 826; sinking fund created from savings in 
interest, 873.] 

[Economists, the French. See Oeconomists.j 

Edinburgh [land and water traffic from to London, 18; tenpence a day the price 
of labour, 75; bankers pay 4 per cent., 90; wages only half what they are in 
London, no; lodgings much dearer than in London, 117, 118; new town 
contains no Scotch timber, 166; two public banks founded, 281; owing to 
cash accounts, merchants have an advantage over those of London, 283; 
Rawing and redrawing on London, 294;] its present share of trade owing to 
the removal of the court and parliament, 320; [trade with England, 349 ] 
Education, the principal cause of the various talents observable in different men, 
15; [for a particular employment much be replaced from earnings, loi.] 
[Institutions for, 681, 716-40;] those parts of, for which there are no public 
institutions, generally the best taught, 721; in universities, a view of, 727; of 
travelling for, 728; course of, in the republics of ancient Greece, 728; in an- 
cient Rome, 729; the ancient teachers superior to those in modern times, 
732; public institutions injurious to good education, 733; inquiry how far 
the public ought to attend to the education of the people, 734; the different 
opportunities of education in the different ranks of the people, 736; the ad- 
vantages of a proper attention in the state to the education of the people, 
739-40; [beneficial to the whole society and therefore not unjustly defrayed 
by general contribution, 768.] 

[Edward VI., coin adulterated under, 885.] 

Egypt, the first country in which apiculture and manufactures appear to have 
been cultivated [owing to the Nile], 20; [religion bound every man to follow 
the occupation of his father, 62; wealth of ancient, 348, 360, 380; disliked 
the sea, 348; neglected foreign commerce, 462.] 

Agriculture was greatly favoured there, 645; [caste system, ib.; great 
works on the Nile, / 5 .;] was long the granary of the Roman empire, 647; 
[ancient revenue chiefly land-tax, ih,) two languages, 722; land-tax anciently 
20 per cent., 789; good roads, ih.] 

Ejectment, action of, in England, when invented, and its operation, 368. 
'Elboeuf, 84.] 

Eldorado, 530.] 

Elections, Countries of, in France, 806.] 

Elizabeth, Queen, first to wear stockings in England, 245.] 

Empires all mortal, but aim at immortality, 781-2.] 

Employments, the advantages and disadvantages of the different kinds of, in the 
same neighbourhood, continually tend to equality, 99; the differences or 
inequalities among, specified, 100; the constancy or precariousness of, influ- 
ences the rate of wages, 103. 

[Emulation, pod effects of, even in mean professions, 717; always excited by 
competition, 732.] 

[Enclosure, where scarce, may be specially profitable, 150.] 

[Endowments, bad effect of, on education, 716-33.] 



INDEX 


927 


England, the dates of its several species of coinage, silver, gold, and copper, 39; 
why labour is cheaper there, than in North America, 69; the rate of popula- 
tion in both countries compared, 70; the produce and labour of, have gradu- 
ally increased from the earliest accounts in history, while writers are repre- 
senting the country as rapidly declining, 327; enumeration of obstructions 
and calamities which the prosperity of the country has surmounted, 328; 
circumstances that favour commerce and manufactures, 393; laws in favour 
of agriculture, 393-4; why formerly unable to carry on foreign wars of long 
duration, 413; why the commerce with France has been subjected to so 
many discouragements, 462; foundation of the enmity between these 
countries, 463. 

Translation of the commercial treaty concluded in 1703, with Portugal, 
512-3; inquity into the value of the trade with Portugal, 513-4; might pro- 
cure gold without the Portugal trade, 515; consequences of securing the 
colony trade by the navigation act, 5:62. 

[English Copper Company of London, 715.] 

Engrossing, see Forestalling. 

[Engrossing of land in ancient times, 361; in colonies, 539.] 

Entails, the law of, prevents the division of land by alienation, 361; intention of, 
362. 

Enumerated commodities, 470, 543-4.] 

Ephesus, 533.] 

Ephron, 25,] 

Epices, the chief part of French judges^ emolument, 678; distributed in propor- 
tion to their diligence, ib] 

Epictetus, a teacher, 764.] 

Epicurus possessed gardens, 731,] 

Equality of taxation defined, 777.] 

Equipage, 164, 331; American colonies a showy, of the British Empire, 899.] 
Equity demands that labourers should be tolerably well fed, &c., 79.] 

Esau, 391.] 

Eton College prices of corn, 185, 191-2, 199.] 

Europe, general review of the several nations of, as to their improvement since 
the discovery of America, 202; the two richest countries in, enjoy the great- 
est shares of the carrying trade, 354. 

Inquiry into the advantages derived by, from the discovery and coloniza- 
tion of America, 557; the particular advantages derived by each colonizing 
country, 559; and by others which have no colonies, 591. 

(Eustatia Island, 537.] 

(Euxine, 20.] 

Exchange, the operation of, in the commercial intercourse of different countries, 
401; the course of, an uncertain criterion of the balance of trade between 
two countries, 442; [explanation of ‘at par,^ ‘in favour of' and ‘against,' 
442-4;] is generally in favour of those countries which pay in bank money, 
against those which pay in common currency, 455. 

[Exchequer bills a part of the unfunded debt, 864 J 

Excise, the principal objects of, 829; the duties of, more clear and distinct than 
the customs, 834; affects only a few articles of the most general consiunp- 
tion, 834; [embarrasses the smuggler more than customs, 835;] the excise 
scheme of Sir Robert Walpole defended, 837; the excise upon home made 
fermented and spirituous liquors, the most productive, 838; expence of 
levying excise duties computed, 847; the laws of, more vexatious than those 
of the customs, 849-50; [would require alteration if extended to the colonies, 
888 .] 

[Executioner best paid of all common trades, 100.] 

Exercise, military, alteration in, produced by the invention of fire arms, 660. 
Expences, private, how they influence the national capital, 329; the advantage 
of bestowing them on durable commodities, 329-31. 



INDEX 


928 

[Expilly, Jean Joseph, quoted, 856.] 

Export trade, the principles of, explained, 353; when rude produce may be ad- 
vantageously exported, even by a foreign capital, 360; why encouraged by 
European nations, 417; by what means promoted, 418. 

The motives to, and tendency of, drawbacks of duties, 466; the grant of 
bounties on, considered, 472; exportation of the materials of manufactures, 
review of the restraints and prohibitions of, 612. 

Faith, articles of, how regulated by the civil magistrate, 749. 

Families, seldom remain on large estates for many generations in commercial 
countries, 391. 

Famine, see Dearth. 

Farmers of land, the several articles that compose their gain, distinguished, 53; 
require more knowledge and experience than the generality of manufactur- 
ers, 127; in what their capitals consist, 263; the great quantity of productive 
labour put into motion by their capitals, 344; artificers necessary to them, 
358; their situation better in England than in any other part of Europe, 368; 
labour under great disadvantages every where, 370; origin of long leases of 
farms, 390; are a class of men least subject to the wretched spirit of mono- 
poly, 428. 

Were forced, by old statutes, to become the only dealers in com, 495; 
could not sell corn cheaper than any other corn merchant, 496; could seldom 
sell it so cheap, 497"8,* the culture of land obstructed by this division of their 
capitals, 497; the use of corn dealers to the farmers, 498; how they contri- 
bute to the annual production of the land, according to the French agricul- 
tural system of political oeconomy, 628. 

Farmers of the publick revenue, their character, 853-4, 871-2. 

Farm-rent paid by boroughs, 374-5, 378 ] 

Ferdinand and Isabella, 526.J 

Pernambuco, 542, 543.] 

Fertile lands cultivated first, 92.] 

Fertility, rent of land varies with, 147.] 

Feudal government, miserable state of the occupiers of land under, 318; trade 
and interest of money under, ib.; feudal chiefs, their power, 362; slaves, their 
situation, 364-5; tenures of land, 366; taxation, 370; original poverty and 
servile state of the tradesmen in towns, 373; immunities seldom granted but 
for valuable considerations, 374; origin of free burghs, 375; the power of the 
barons reduced by municipal privileges, 376-7; the cause and effect of an- 
cient hospitality, 385; extensive power of the ancient barons, 386-7; was not 
established in England until the Norman conquest, ib.; was silently sub- 
verted by manufactures and commerce, 388. 

Feudal wars, how supported, 656; military exercises not well attended to, 
under, 659; standing armies gradually introduced to supply the place of the 
feudal militia, 666; account of the casualties or taxes under, 81 1; [merchants 
despised and envied, 829;] revenues under, how enjoyed by the great land- 
holders, 859. 

Fiars, public, in Scotland, [supply evidence of the fall in the price of grain, 76, 
240;] the nature of the institution explained, 182. 

[Fidei commissa, 363.] 

[Fifteenths and tenths resembled the taillej 370.] 

Fines for the renewal of leases, the motive for exacting them, and their tendency, 

783- 

[Finisterre, Cape, 469, 546, 580, 888.] 

Fire arms, alteration in the art of war, effected by the invention of, 660, 669; the 
invention of, favourable to the extension of civilization, 668-9. 

[Fire (i.e. steam) engine, 9.] 

[Fire insurance, 108.] 

Fish, the component parts of the price of, explained, 51; [case in which rent forms, 
a part of their price, 145;] the multiplication of, at market, by human in 



INDEX 929 

dustry, both limited and uncertain, 235; how an increase of demand raises 
the price of fish, 235. 

Fisheries, observations on the tonnage bounties granted to, 484; to the herring 
fishery, 485; the boat fishery ruined by this bounty, 487. 

Flanders, [onions imported from, 78; wool exported to, 162; fine manufacture of 
wool, 247; English wool exc^nged for fine cloths of, 380; ancient manufac- 
ture of fine cloth, 381; carried on chiefly with English and Spanish wool, 
382;] the ancient pmmercial prosperity of, perpetuated by the solid im- 
provements of agriculture, 396; [importation of bone lace from, prohibited 

434.] 

[Industry augmented by colonisation of America, 557; supplies linen to 
America, 591.] 

Flax, the component parts of the price of, explained, 51. 

Fleetwood, bishop, remarks on his Chronicon Preciosum, 182, 184; [quoted, 184, 
185, 232.] 

[Florence, a Roman colony, 533; paid Lorenzo’s trading debts, 771.] 

[Florida, French settlers in, murdered by Spaniards, 536.] 

[Flota, the Spanish, 572.] 

Flour, the component parts of the price of, explained, 51; [duties on, common, 
826.] 

[Fontainebleau, 319.] 

Food, will always purchase as much labour as it can maintain on the spot, 146; 
bread and butchers’ meat compared, 148, 151; is the original source of every 
other production, 164; the abundance of, constitutes the principal pait of 
the riches of the world, and gives the principal value to many other kinds of 
riches, 174. 

Forestalling and engrossing, the popular fear of, like the suspicions of witch- 
craft, 500. 

Forts, when necessary for the protection of commerce, 690. 

[Foundling hospitals, high mortality in, 79.] 

France [quality and price of corn, silks, hardware and woollens compared with 
Poland and England, 6; debasement of coin, 35; ratio of gold to silver, 43; 
seignorage of 8 per cent., 45, 518; high rented vineyards, 61; fall in price 
of grain since seventeenth century, 76, 198, 240, 474;] fluctuations in the 
legal rate of interest for money there, during the course of the present cen- 
tury, 90; remarks on the trade and riches of, 91; [market rate of interest 
higher than in England, wages lower, richer than Scotland but not progress- 
ing so fast, ih,\ carrying trade taken by the Dutch, 91;] the nature of ap- 
prenticeships there, 1 21; the propriety of restraining the planting of vine- 
yards, examined, 154, 158; [corn carefully cultivated in the wine provinces, 
154-5; vineyards need not be envied by Britain, 159;] variations in the price 
of grain there, 180; [labouring poor seldom eat butchers’ meat, 187; fall in 
price of corn, though exportation of grain was prohibited till 1764, 198, 474;] 
the money price of labour has sunk gradually with the money price of corn, 
200; [improved since the colonisation of America, 202; silver preponderates 
in the coinage of, 213; exports poultry to England, 225; price of pork nearly 
equal to that of beef, 225-6;] foundation of the Mississippi scheme, 302; 
[corn as cheap as in England though there is little paper money, 309;] little 
trade or industry to be found in the parliament towns of, 319-20; [futile 
attempt to reduce the rate of interest, 340; lawyers have dressed entails in 
the garb of substitutions and fidci commisses, 363;] description of the class 
of farmers called metayers, 366; laws relating to the tenure of land, [short- 
ness of leases], 369; services formerly exacted beside rent, ih.\ the taille, 
what, and its operation in checking the cultivation of land, 370; origin of 
the magistrates and councils of cities, 377-8; [wine exchanged for English 
wool, 380; wine and brandy for Polish corn, ih.^ breeding of silk worms in- 
troduced in reign of Charles IX., 382; allodial ownership preceded the 
feudal system, 387; cultivation and improvement inferior to that of Eng- 
land, 394-5;] no direct legal encouragement given to agriculture, 395; 



930 


INDEX 


[prohibition of exporting coin, 403; exchange of wine for English hardware 
not supposed disadvantageous to England, 408; last war with, cost ninety 
millions, 410; Merovingian Kings had treasures, 414; established exclusive 
company for East India trade, 417;] ill policy of M, Colbert’s commercial 
regulations, 434; French goods heavily taxed in Great Britain, 440; the com- 
mercial intercourse between France and England now chiefly carried on by 
smugglers, 441; the policy of the commercial restraints between France and 
Britain, considered, 441-2; [par of exchange, 442-3, 446;] state of the coinage 
there, 445; [invasion of Holland, 452, 453; advantages of trade with, 457; 
cheap wine does not cause drunkenness, 459-60; wine discouraged by Eng- 
lish in favour of Portugal, 460;] why the commerce with England has been 
subjected to discouragements, 462-3; [much more populous and rich than 
the American colonies and therefore a better market, 463;] foundation of 
the enmity between these countries [France and England], ib. 

[England unwilling to carry French goods, 468; no drawback allowed by 
England on exportation of French wines to America, 470; scarce ever 
necessary to restrain exportation of corn, 507; provisions of Methuen treaty 
as to wine and wool, 512, 513; required Portugal to exclude British ships, 
515;] remarks concerning the seignorage on coin, 5x8; standard of the gold 
coin there, ib,\ [no gold or silver mines in the American colonies, 531; settle- 
ments in America, 536-8; plenty of good land there, 538; subject to custom 
of Paris, 539; no revenue from colonies, 541 ; policy of establishing exclusive 
companies, 542;] the trade of the French colonies, how regulated, 543; 
[refining sugar flourishes in colonies, 548;] the government of the colonies 
conducted with moderation, 552; the sugar colonies of, better governed, 
than those of Britain, 553; [slaves better managed there, ih.; capital accu- 
mulated there, 554; industry augmented by colonisation of America, 557; 
tobacco dearer than in England, 561; navy, 563; tobacco imports, 569; in- 
vasion of England, 571;] the kingdom of, how taxed, 585; the members of 
the lea^e, fought more in defence of their own importance, than for any 
other cause, 588; [supplies linen to America, 591; East Indian trade now 
open, 59 5 ; English import duty on yam, 608; English prohibition of linen 
imports, 609; indigo, 610; exclusive trade in gum senega, &c., taken by 
England, 622;] the present agricultural system of political oeconomy adopt- 
ed by philosophers there, described, 627[-43; type of agricultural country, 
632; agriculture and corn trade relieved from restraint owing to the (econo- 
mists, 642-3; half or one-third of the population agricultural, 646; veterans 
defeated by English standing army, 663; fees in parliaments, 678; cost of 
Languedoc canal, 684;] under what direction the funds for the repair of the 
roads are placed, 686; general state of the roads, 687; [great roads only at- 
tended to, 688; tyranny of the coro^^ 689; South Sea Company ruined by 
the slave trade, 703;] the universities bacily governed, 719; remarks on the 
management of the parliaments of, 751; measures taken in, to reduce the 
power of the clergy, 756; [Reformation, 758; only one professor whose works 
are worth reading, 763; treasure of Berne invested in the funds, 765, 772; 
the oeconomists, 782; the predial taille, 787, 805;] account of the mode of 
rectifying the inequalities of the predial taille in the generality of Montau- 
ban, 787; the personal taille e:^lained, 805; the inequalities in, how reme- 
died, 806; how the personal taille discourages cultivation, 807-8; the Ving- 
tieme, 809; stamp duties and the contrdle, 812-4; [taille charged on worL 
men a direct tax on wages, 817;] the capitation tax, how rated, 819; [leather 
shoes not necessaries, 822; tobacco taxed fifteen times its value, 823; silk 
manufactures could be undersold by English, 837; p6ages, 845;] restraints 
upon the interior trade of the country by the local variety of the revenue 
laws, 852; the duties on tobacco and salt, how levied, 854; the different 
sources of revenue in, 855; how the finances of, might be reformed, ib.; the 
French system of taxation compared with that in Britain, 856; [might levy 
three times the British revenue, ih.\ billets d*itat at a discount, 864;] the 
nature of tontines explained, 870; estimate of the whole national debt of, 



INDEX 93 X 

ib.] [reason for more of the debt being in annuities than in England, 871; 
more wealthy bachelors, ih,\ oppressive public debt, 881; augmentation of 
coin, 885.] 

[Franciscans revived languishing faith, 742.] 

[Frederick of Holstein, 758 ] 

[Freedom defined 375.] 

[Freedom of trade would supply gold and silver as well as wine, 404; would sup- 
ply an agricultural country with artificers and merchants, 635.] 

[Fr6zier, quoted, 168-9, 203-4.] 

Frugality, generally a predominating principle in human nature, 324. 

[Fruit yields greater profit and rent than corn, 152.] 

Fuller’s earth, the exportation of, why prohibited, 619. 

Funds, British, [Dutch holding in, 91; Bernese treasure partly invested in, 772;] 
brief historical view of, 863-4; operation of, politically considered, 876; the 
practice of funding, has gradually enfeebled every state that has adopted it, 
881. 

Fur trade, the first principles of, 162. 

[Gabelle, compounded for, 852; one of the great sources of French revenue, 855.] 
Gama, Vasco de, the first European who discovered a naval track to the East 
Indies, 526. 

[Ganges, 20, 327, 646.] 

Gardening, the gains from, distinguished into the component parts, 53; not a 
profitable employment, 153. 

[Garonne, 319.] 

[Gassendi, a professor who entered the church, 763.] 

Gemelli-Carreri, quoted, 534. 

Gems, see Stones. 

General fund, in the British finances, explained, 867. 

[Geneva, respectable clergy of, 762; eminent men of letters are professors, 763.] 
[Gengis Khan, 398.] 

Genoa, why corn is dear in the territory of, 190; [shipping encouraged by the 
Crusades, 380; small state obliged to use foreign coin, 446; bank of, 447; 
Columbus belonged to, 526; tax on bread, 827; enfeebled by debt, 881.] 
[Gentlemen, English university education not proper for forming, 727; would be 
better educated in the absence of public educational institutions, 733.] 
[Gentoo, government of India, 645; religion, 646,] 

[Geometry should be taught in parish schools, 737.] 

[Georgia, cost of civil establishment, 540; not planted at time of Navigation Act, 

[Germany, improved since the discovery of America, 202; nation of, overran 
Roman Empire, 361; species of slavery still exists in, 365; purveyance still 
exists in, 370; free towns of, 378; expense of last war laid out in, 410, 581; 
foreign trade, 441.] 

[Linen exported from England to the colonies receives a drawback, 551; 
linen eiq^orted to America, 557, 570, 591; drained by the Spanish Flota, 572; 
trade with America, 591, 592; could have been conquered by Rome, 665; 
justice a source of revenue, 675; just beyond the shepherd stage when Rome 
fell 676; Reformation in, 758; eminent men of letters often professors, 

763-4*1 

[Ghent, 396.] 

[Gibraltar, straits of, 19; acquisition of, served to unite the house of Bourbon, 
698-9.] 

[Gilbert, Baron, quoted, 368.] 

Glasgow, [recent rise in the demand for labour, 76;] the trade of, doubled in 
fifteen years, by erecting banks there, 281; why a city of greater trade than 
Edinburgh, 320, 

[Glass grinding company, 715.] 

[Glaucus’ armour cost 100 oxen, 23.] 



932 


INDEX 


[Goa, 599.] 

[Golconda, 172.] 

Gold, not the standard of value in England, 39; its value measured by silver, 40: 
reformation of the gold coin, 41, 42; mint price of gold in England, 42; the 
working the mines of, in Peru, very unprofitable, 1 70-1; qualities for which 
this metal is valued, 172; the proportional value of, to silver, how rated be- 
fore and after the discovery of the American mines, 211; is cheaper in the 
Spanish market than silver, 213. 

Great quantities of, remitted annually from Portugal to England, 513; 
why little of it remains in England, 514; is always to be had for its value, 

515- 

Gold and silver, the prices of, how affected by the increase of the quantity of the 
metals, 188; are commodities that naturally seek the best market, 188; are 
metals of the least value among the poorest nations, 190; the increase in the 
quantity of, by means of wealth and improvement, has no tendency to 
diminish their value, 190- 1; the annual consumption of these metals very 
considerable, 207; annual importation of, into Spain and Portugal, 208; are 
not likely to multiply beyond the demand, 210; the durability of, the cause 
of the steadiness of their price, 210; on what circumstances the quantity^ of, 
in every particular country, depends, 236; the low value of these metals in a 
country, no evidence of its wealth, nor their high value of its poverty, 239; 
if not employed at home, will be sent abroad notwithstanding all prohibi- 
tions, 323; the reason why European nations have studied to accumulate 
these metals, 399; commercial arguments in favour of their e^qportation, 
400; these, and all other commodities, are mutually the prices of each other, 
404; the quantity of, in every country, regulated by the effectual demand, 
404; why the prices of these metals do not fluctuate so much as those of 
other commodities, 405; to preserve a due quantity of, in a country, no 
proper object of attention for the government, ib.; the accumulated gold 
and silver in a country distinguished into three parts, 409; a great quantity 
of buUion alternately exported and imported for the purposes of foreign 
trade, 41 1-2; annual amount of these metals imported into Spain and Portu- 
gal, 412; the importation of, not the principal benefit derived from foreign 
trade, 415; the value of, how affected by the discovery of the American 
mines, ih.\ and by the passage round the Cape of Good Hope to the East 
Indies, 416; effect of the annual exportation of silver to the East Indies, 417; 
the commercial means pursued to increase the quantity of these metals in a 
country, 418, 440; bullion how received and paid at the bank of Amsterdam, 
448; at what prices, *449, note) a trading country without mines, not likely 
to be exhausted by an annual exportation of these metals, 459. 

The value of, in Spain and Portugal, depreciated by restraining the ex- 
portation of them, 478; are not imported for the purposes of plate or coin 
but for foreign trade, 516; the search after mines of, the most ruinous of all 
projects, 529; are valuable, because scarce, and difficult to be procured, 
530 - 

Gorgias, evidence of the wealth he acquired by teaching, 133. 

[Gottenburg, tea smuggled from, 205; company, 405,] 

Government, civil, indispensably necessary for the security of private property, 
670; subordination in society, by what means introduced, ih.) inequality of 
fortune introduces civil government for its preservation, 674; the adminis- 
tration of justice, a source of revenue in early times, ih,) why government 
ought not to have the management of turnpikes, 685; nor of other public 
works, 689 j [expense of, like that of a great estate, 777; soon learns the art 
of draining its subjects’ pockets, 813;] want of parsimony during peace, im- 
poses a necessity of contracting debts to carry on a war, 861; must support 
a regular administration of justice to cause manufactures and commerce to 
flourish, 862; origin of a national debt, 863; progression of public debts, ih.) 
war, why generally agreeable to the people, 872. 

Governors, political, the greatest spendthrifts in society, 329. 



INDEX 


933 


[Gracchi, 729.] 

[Grapes might be grown in Scotland at sufficient expense, 425.] 

Grasses, artificial, tend to reduce the price of butcher^s meat, 151. 

Graziers, subject to monopolies obtained by manufacturers to their prejudice, 
619. 

Greece, [ancient, had no word for apprentice, 123; slavery harsher than in the 
middle ages, 364; cultivation of com degenerated, 365; citizens consisted of 
landed proprietors, 373; opulent and industrious, 380.] 

Foreign trade promoted [prohibited] in several of the antient states of, 
647; [trade and manufactures carried on by slaves, 648; citizens long served 
in war without pay, 656;] militaiy exercises, a part of general education, 
658; soldiers not a distinct profession in, 658; [individual military exercises, 
660; militias defeated by Macedonian and Roman standing armies, 663-4; 
but had defeated Persian militia, 666; just beyond the shepherd stage at the 
Trojan war, 676;] course of education in the republics of, 728; the morals of 
the Greeks inferior to those of the Romans, [732; sanguinary factions, 
729; exercises and elementary education, 730;] schools of the philosophers 
and rhetoricians, 730; law no science among the Greeks, 731; courts of 
justice, ih.) [abilities of people equal to those of modem nations, 732;] the 
martial spirit of the people, how supported, 739; [great men of letters were 
teachers, 764; public revenue largely obtained from state lands, 773.] 
[Greek clergy turbulent, 750.] 

Greek colonies, [reasons for sending them out, 523;] how distinguished from 
Roman colonies, 524-5; rapid progress of these colonies, 533; [plenty of good 
land, 534; sometimes contributed military force but seldom revenue, 559; 
England and America might imitate the tie between mother country and 
colony, ih] 

Greek language, how introduced as apart of university education, 722-3; philo- 
sophy, the three great branches of, 723. 

Green glass, tax on, 829.] 

Greenland seal fishery, 608; South Sea Company’s whale fisheiy, 703.] 
Grenada sugar refinery, 548; new field for speculation, 895.] 

Grocer, high profits of, explained, 112.] 

Ground rents, great variations of, according to situation, 792; are a more proper 
subject of taxation than houses, 795; [tax on the sale of, 813.] 

Guastalla, 827.] 

Guernsey, 584.] 

Guicciardini, quoted, 395 ] 

Guienne, 155.] 

Guilds, adulterine, 124.] 

Guinea coast, 459, 525, 698.] 

Guineas, not used in computations, 39; Drummond’s notes for, 41 J 
Gum senega, review of the regulations imposed on the trade for, 622, [832]. 
[Gumilla, 530.] 

Gunpowder, great revolution effected in the art of war by the invention of, 661, 
668; this invention favourable to the extension of civilization, 669. 
Gustavus Vasa, how enabled to establish the reformation in Sweden, 758. 
[G3annazium, 658, 729, 738.] 

[Hackney coaches and chairs, taxes on, 804.] 

[Hale, Lord Chief Justice, quoted, 77.] 

[Halifax, 383.] 

Hamburgh, [houses of, supported by Bank of England, 304; goods imported 
from, paid for by bills on Holland, 443; exchange with, formerly unfavour- 
able, 445-6; a small state which must use foreign coin, 446;] agio of the bank 
of, explained, 447* 

[British colonial monopoly hampers the merchants, 592; type of mercan- 
tile state, 632;] sources of the revenue of that city, 769-70, 772; the inhabi- 
tants, of, how taxed to the state, 801. 



934 INDEX 

Hamburgh Company, some account of, 692 
Hamilcai, 663.] 

Hannibal, 664.] 

Hanseatic league, causes that rendered it formidable, 378; why no vestige re- 
mains of the wealth of the Hans towns, 395 ] 

Harbours, cost of, should be defrayed by a port duty on tonnage of ships, 682.] 
Hardware, 408, 458; Birmingham manufacturers buy wine with, 848 ] 
Hasdrubal, see Asdrubal.] 

Hawkers, tax on, 804 ] 

Hawkins, Serjeant, quoted, 613.] 

Hazard, capitalist paid for incurring, 48.] 

Hearth money, why abolished in England, 797. 

Hebrew language not a part of common university education, 722.] 

Hebrides, wages in, 76; herring fishery, 486 ] 

Hinault, President, quoted, 588.] 

Henry VIII. of England, prepares the way for the reformation by shutting out 
the authority of the Pope, 758; [adulterated the coin, 885.] 

Henry IV. of France, siege of Paris, 588; had a treasure, 861.] 

Henry, Prince, 151.] 

Heptarchy, 327.] 

Herbert, quoted, 180, 198.] 

Herring buss bounty, remarks on, 485; fraudulent claims of the bounty, 486;^ the 
boat fishery the most natural and profitable, ih.\ account of the British 
white-herring fishery, 488; account of the busses fitted out in Scotland, the 
amount of their cargoes, and the bounties on them, 901 [-2]. 

[Hesiod, quoted, 724.] 

Hides, the produce of rude countries, commonly carried to a distant market, 228; 
price of, in England three centuries ago, 231-2; salted hides inferior to fresh 
ones, 233; the price of, how affected by circumstances, in cultivated and in 
uncultivated countries, 233. 

[Higgling of the market, 31.] 

Highlands of Scotland, [could not support a nailer, 18; wages in, 76;] interesting 
remarks on the population of, 79; [high mortality of children, ih.\ cattle of, 
admitted to England by the Union, 149, 220-2; old families common in, 
391;] military character of the Highlanders, 662. 

Highways origmally maintained by sk days’ labour, 773.] 

[Hippias, lived in splendour, 133; peripatetic, 730.] 

[Hispaniola, 229.] 

Hobbes, Mr., remarks on his definition of wealth, 31. 

Hogs, circumstances which render their flesh cheap or dear, 225. 

Holland, [water carriage afforded by the Maese, 20; ratio of silver to gold, 14 to 
I, 43;] observations on the riches and trade of the republic of, 91; [richer 
than England, wages high, profits low, gained carrying trade of France, 
holds large amount in French and English funds, not decaying, ^6.;] not to 
follow some business, unfashionable there, 96; [corn chiefly imported, 150; 
spices burnt to keep up the price, 158, 491, 600;] cause of the dearness of 
corn there, 190; [improved since the discovery of America, 202; expelled the 
Portuguese from India, 204, 417; tea smuggled from, 205; houses supported 
by Bank of England, 304; operation of carrying trade, 351, 352;] enjoys the 
greatest share in the canyng trade of Europe, 354; [farmers not inferior to 
those of England, 371; legislature attentive to commerce and manufactures, 
393; exchange with, 401; East India Company’s tea smuggled into England, 
405; imports lean cattle, 427; Dutch imdertaker of woollen manufacture at 
Abbeville, 428;] how the Dutch were excluded from being the carriers to 
Great Britain, 430; [supplied other nations with fish, ih.\ bad terms with 
England, i6.;] is a country that prospers under the heaviest taxation, 433; 
[French wme smuggled, 442; computation of state of credit and debit, 
443-4;] account of the bank of Amsterdam, 447; [market price of bullion 



INDEX 93S 

above the mint price, 449;] this republic derives even its subsistence from 
foreign trade, 464. 

[Buys English corn cheaper and can sell manufactures cheaper in conse- 
quence of the British corn bounty, 480; must carry on herring fishery in 
decked vessels, 486; position in regard to the Methuen treaty, 513; no gold, 
silver or diamonds in the American colonies, 531; attack on Brazil, 535; 
settlements in 17th century, 536; Cura^oa and Eustatia free ports, 537; ex- 
clusive company for colonial commerce, 542; naval power in 1660, 563; pos- 
sessed New York and New Jersey, ih,\ tobacco imports, 569; linen exported 
to America, 570, 591; maintains monopoly of trade to the spice islands, 595; 
would send more ships to the East Indies if the trade were free, 596; settle- 
ments at the Cape and Batavia the most considerable in Africa and the 
East Indies, 599; destructive policy in East Indies, 601, 602; English duty 
on yarn, 608; gum senega clandestinely exported from England, 622; t3^e 
of mercantile state, 632; subsistence drawn from other countries, 641-2; 
great cities the capitals of little republics, 760; respectable clergy, 762; 
eminent men of letters often professors, 763-4; monopoly of madder owing 
to existence of tithe elsewhere, 789;] tax paid on houses there, 797; [rate of 
interest, ih ; 2 per cent, tax on capital paid voluntarily, 803; a tax intended 
to fall on capital, 803; servants' tax, 809;] account of the tax upon succes- 
sions, 810; stamp duties, 812; [tea and sugar luxuries of the poorest, 823; 
taxes on bread and necessaries ruined manufactures, 826-7;] amount of 
taxes in, ih.^ 857; [tea taxed by licence to drink, 829; expense of preserving 
from the sea, 857;] its prosperity depends on the republican form of govern- 
ment, ih. 

Holstein, cattle of, exported to Holland, 642 ] 

Holy Land, 380.] 

Homer, quoted, 23, 676.] 

Honoraries from pupils to teachers in colleges, tendency of, to quicken their dili- 
gence, 717. 

[Hop-garden, high profit of, 152.] 

Hose, in the time of Edward IV. how made, 245. 

Hospitality, ancient, the cause and effect of, 385, 859. 

[Hottentots, 599,] 

House, different acceptations of the term in England, and some other countries, 
1 1 8, [163]; houses considered as part of the national stock, 264; houses pro- 
duce no revenue, 264, 265. 

The rent of, distinguished into two parts, 791; operation of a tax upon 
house rent, payable by the tenant, 792; house rent the best test of the ten- 
ant’s circumstances, 794; proper regulation of a tax on ih.\ how taxed in 
Holland, 797; hearth money, ih.; window tax, ih.; [tax on sale of, 813.] 

Hudson’s bay company, the nature of their establishment and trade, 701; their 
profits not so high as has been reported, 702. 

[Hume, quoted, 229, 309, 337, 385, 413, 742-3 ] 

[Hungary, Danube little use to, 21; serfs still exist in, 365; industry encouraged 
by colonisation of America, 557; mines worked by free men, 648.] 

Hunters, war how supported by a nation of, 653; cannot be very numerous, 654; 
no established administration of justice needful among them, 669; age the 
sole foundation of rank and precedency among, 671; no considerable in- 
equality of fortune, or subordination to be found among them, 672; no 
hereditary honours in such a society, 673; [minds kept alive by absence of 
division of labour, 735.] 

Husbandmen, war how supported by a nation of, 655. 

Husbandry, see Agriculture. 

[Hutchinson, quoted, 893.] 

[Hyder Ali, 711.] 

Idleness, unfashionable in Holland, 96; [why greater among our ancestors, 319; 
prevails where revenue predominates, 321.] 



INDEX 


936 

[Iguana or Ivana, principal animal of St. Domingo, 527.] 

Importation, why restraints have been imposed on, with the two kinds of, 418; 
how restrained to secure a monopoly of the home market to domestic in- 
dustry, 420; the true policy of these restraints doubtful, 420-1; the free im- 
portation of foreign manufactures more dangerous than that of raw mate- 
rials, 426; how far it may be proper to continue the free importation of 
certain foreign goods, 434; how far it may be proper to restore the free im- 
portation of goods, after it has been interrupted, 435; of the materials of 
manufacture, review of the legal encouragements given to, 607; [statistics 
of, untrustworthy, 833.] 

Independents, the principles of that sect explained, 745. 

India, Gulf of, 21 J 

India stock, 605, note 119.] 

Indian com, 527.] 

Indian seas, 595.] 

Indies, see East and West. 

Indostan [violent police compels every man to follow the occupation of his 
father, 62; country labourers better paid than most artificers, 127; labour- 
ers’ real wages less than in Europe, 206; quantity of gold and silver affected 
by American mines, 236; treasure commonly buried in, 268; wonderful 
accounts of its ancient wealth and cultivation, 348; its wealth obtained 
through exportation was in foreign hands, 360; more advanced than Mexico 
and Peru, 416; operation of foreign commerce, 437.] 

[Vasco de Gama arrived by the Cape in 1497, 526;] the several classes of 
people there kept distinct, 645; the natives of, how prevented from under- 
taking long sea voyages, 646; [revenue chiefly from land tax, 647; silk ex- 
ports to Rome, 648; roads and canals, 688; land tax revenue stimulates the 
sovereign’s interest in such works, ib,\ supposed necessity for forts to pro- 
tect commerce, 690; silk should be admitted free to Britain, 837; see East 
Indies and East India Company.] 

Industry, the different kinds of, seldom dealt impartially with by any nation, 
lix; the species of, frequently local, 17; naturally suited to the demand, 58; 
is increased by the liberal reward of labour, 81; how affected by seasons of 
plenty and scarcity, 82; is more advantageously exerted in towns than in the 
country, 125; the average produce of, always suited to the average con- 
sumption, 186-7; is promoted by the circulation of paper money, 278; three 
requisites to putting industry in motion, 279-80; how the general character 
of nations is estimated by, 319; and idleness, the proportion between, how 
regulated, 320; is employed for subsistence, before it extends to con- 
veniences and luxury, 357; whether the general industry of a society, is 
promoted by commercial restraints on importation, 420-1; private interest 
naturally points to that employinent most advantageous to the society, 42 1 ; 
but without intending or knowing it, 423; legal regulations of private in- 
dustry, dangerous assumptions of power, ib.\ domestic industry ought not 
to be employed on what can be purchased cheaper from abroad, 424; of the 
society, can augment only in proportion as its capital augments, 425; when 
it may be necessary to impose some burden upon foreign industry, to favour 
that at home, 429-30; the free exercise of industry ought to be allowed to 
all, 437* 

The natural effort of every individual to better his condition, will, if un- 
restrained, result in the prosperity of the society, 508. 

[Infanticide, Iviii; in China, 72.] 

Insurance, from fire, and sea risks, the nature and profits of, examined, 108; the 
trade of insurance may be successfully carried on by a joint stock company, 
714. 

Interest, landed, monied, and trading, distinguished, 334; [public, promoted by 
private, 423, 594.] 

Interest for the use of money, the foundation of that allowance explained, 52; 
[varies with the rate of profit, 88;] historical view of the alterations of, in 



INDEX 


937 


England, and other countries, 88[-98]; remarks on the high rates of, in 
Bengal, 94; and in China, 95; may be raised by defective laws, independent 
on the influence of wealth or poverty, ihr, the lowest ordinary rate of, must 
somewhat more than compensate occasional losses, ih.) the common relative 
proportion between interest and mercantile profits inquired into, 97; [stock 
lent at, 333-40;] was not lowered in consequence of the discovery of the 
American mines, 337; how the legal rate of, ought to be fixed, 339; conse- 
quences of its being fixed too high or too low, 339-40; the market rate of, 
regulates the price of land, 340. 

[As a source of public revenue, 771; nominally subject to British land 
tax, 774;] whether a proper object of taxation, 800; [fall in the rate of, 801, 
868 .] 

[Invisible hand, 423.] 

[lonians colonised Asia Minor and the .<Egean, 523.] 

Ireland [land not cultivated by factors, 157; supplies strong porters and beautiful 
prostitutes, fed on potatoes, to London, 161; exports salt meat, 229; may 
not export wool except to England, 231; may export raw hides to England 
duty free, 232, 608; may export hides to other countries, 233; only lately 
allowed to export cattle to England, 394;] why never likely to furnish cattle 
to the prejudice of Great Britain, 426-7; [discharged soldiers and seamen 
may exercise any trade in, 437.] 

[Bounty on hemp imported into Britain, 61 1;] the proposed absentee tax 
there considered, 846; [able to pay land tax, 887; extension of British cus- 
tom duties to, proposed, ib . ;] ought in justice to contribute toward the dis- 
charge of the public debt of Great Britain, 896; expediency of a union with 
Great Britain, 897; [would get rid of an oppressive aristocracy and a spirit 
of party, 898.] 

[Isabella of Castile, 526.] 

Isocrates, the handsome income he made by teaching, 132; [man of letters also 
a teacher, 764.] 

[Isthmian games, 738.^ 

Italy [corn chiefly imported during Roman prosperity, 150; question whether a 
new vineyard would be profitable, 154; olive plantations not to be envied by 
Britain, 159; not gone backward since disco veiy of America, 202; introduc- 
tion of wind and water mills, 246; artistic genius decayed but monuments 
remain, 331; cultivation degenerated when abandoned to slaves, 365; prohi- 
bition of exportation and encouragement to importation of corn obstructed 
cultivation, 372; ancient inhabitants were proprietors, 373; cities became 
independent, 378; cities the first which commerce raised to opulence, 380; 
silks and velvets exchanged for com of Poland, ih,) breeding of silkworms 
introduced, 382;] the only great country in Europe, which has been cult! 
vated and improved in every part by means of its foreign commerce, 395 
[sober, though wine is cheap, 459.] 

[In little states restraint on export of corn may sometimes be necessary, 
507;] was originally colonized by the Dorians, 523; [Roman colonies, 524, 
525, 533; Greek colonics, 533; school of philosophers in a Greek colony, ib ; 
result of admission of inhabitants to Roman citizenship, 589; ancient repub- 
lics derived larger part of revenue from state lands, 773; silk manufacturers 
might be undersold by English, 837; small states levy transit duties on the 
Po, 84s; republics all in debt, 861; republics began the practice of funding, 
881.] 

[Jack of all trades, 497.] 

Jamaica, [trade with, more uncertain than that with North America, irr; cir- 
cuitous trade example, 350,] 

[Increasing improvement, 545; desert in 1660, 564;] the returns of trade 
from that island, why irregular, 895. 

[James I , his marriage bed, brought from Denmark, 330.] 



938 INDEX 

[Japan, copper exported to Europe, i68; ratio of silver to gold 8 to i, 21 1; no 
gold and silver mines, but richer than Mexico or Peru, 416.J 

[Batavia on the road to, 600; only country with which China carries on 
her own trade, 644; affords an example to China, 645 ] 

[Jersey, 584.] 

Jewels, see Stones. 

[John, King of England, munificent benefactor to towns, 377 ] 

[John, King of France, adulterated the coin to pay his debts, 885 ] 

[Joint-stock, see Company.] 

Jurisdictions, territorial, did not originate in the feudal law, 387 
[Jus majoratus, 539.] 

Justice, administration of, abandoned to feudal barons, 387; the administration 
of, a duty of the sovereign, 669; in early times a source of revenue to him, 
67s; the making justice subservient to the revenue, a source of great abuses, 
675; is never administered gratis, 677; the whole administration of, but an 
inconsiderable part of the expence of government, ih.) how the whole ex- 
pence of justice might be defrayed from the fees of court, 677-8; the inter- 
ference of the jurisdictions of the several English courts of law, accounted 
for, 679; law language, how corrupted, 680; the judicial and executive 
power, why divided, ih.\ by whom the expence of the administration of, 
ought to be borne, 767; [good administration of, necessary for flourishing 
commerce and mamifactures, 862.] 

[Jutland cattle exported to Holland, 642.] 

Kalm, the Swedish traveller, his account of the husbandry of the British colonies 
in North America, 223. 

Kelp, a rent demanded for the rocks on which it grows, 145. 

[Kent, special restrictions on removal of wool, 614 ] 

[Kidders of corn restrained, 495.] 

King, Mr., [quoted, 77;] his account of the average price of wheat, 196. 

King, under feudal institutions, no more than the greatest baron in the nation, 
387; was unable to restrain the violence of his barons, 388. 

Treasure trove an important branch of revenue to, 860; his situation how 
favourable for the accumulating treasure, ih.\ in a commercial country, 
naturally spends his revenue in luxuries, 861; is hence driven to call upon 
his subjects for extraordinary aids, ib. 

Kings and their ministers, the greatest spendthrifts in a country, 329 
[Kbnigsberg, 421.] 

Labour, the fund which originally supplies every nation with its annual con- 
sumption, Ivii; how the proportion between labour and consumption is 
regulated, th , ; the different kinds of industry seldom dealt impartially with 
by any nation, lix; the division of labour considered, 3; this division in- 
creases the quantity of work, 7; instances in illustration, 1 1 ; from what prin- 
ciple the division of labour originates, 13 ; the divisibility of, governed by the 
market, 17; labour the real measure of the exchangeable value of commod- 
ities, 30; different kinds of, not easily estimated by immediate comparison, 
31; is compared by the intermediate standard of money, 32; is an invariable 
standard for the value of commodities, 33; has a real, and a nominal price, 
ih.\ the quantity of labour employed on different objects, the only rule for 
exchanging them in the rude stages of society, 47; difference between the 
wages of labour and profits on stock, in manufactures, 48; the whole labour 
of a country never exerted, 54; is in every instance suited to the demand, 
58; the effect of extraordinary calls for, 59; the deductions made from the 
produce of labour employed upon land, 65; why dearer in North America 
than in England, 69-70; is cheap in countries that are stationary, 71; the 
demand for, would continually decrease in a declining country, 73; the 
province of Bengal cited as an instance, 73; is not badly paid for in Great 
Britain, ib.\ an increasing demand for, favourable to population, 80; that of 



INDEX 939 

freemen cheaper to the employers than that of slaves, 8o; the money price 
of, how regulated, 85; is liberally rewarded in new colonies, 92; common 
labour and skilful labour distinguished, 10 1; the free circulation of, from 
one employment to another, obstructed by corporation laws, 135; the un- 
equal prices of, in different places, probably owing to the law of settlements, 
140; can always procure subsistence on the spot where it is purchased, 146; 
the money price of, in different countries, how governed, 189; is set into 
motion by stock employed for profit, 249; the division of, depends on the 
accumulation of stock, 259; machines to facilitate labour, advantageous to 
society, 272; productive and unproductive, distinguished, 314; various 
orders of men specified, whose labour is unproductive, 315; unproductive 
labourers all maintained by revenue, 316; the price of, how raised by the 
increase of the national capital, 336; its price, though nominally raised, may 
continue the same, 338. 

Is liberally rewarded in new colonies, 532; of artificers and manufacturers, 
never adds any value to the whole amount of the rude produce of the land, 
according to the French agricultural system of political ceconomy, 631; this 
doctrine shewn to be erroneous, 639-40; the productive powers of labour, 
how to be improved, 641; [forced, 689, 773; division of, see Division of 
labour.] 

Labourers, useful and productive, eveiy where proportioned to the capital stock 
on wtdeh they are employed, Iviii; share the produce of their labour, in 
most cases, with the owners of the stock on which they are employed, 49; 
their wages a continued subject of contest between them and their masters, 
66; are seldom successful in their outrageous combinations, 67; the suffi- 
ciency of their earnings, a point not easily determined, 67-8; their wages 
sometimes raised by increase of work, 68; their demands limited by the 
funds destined for payment, 69; are continually wanted in North America, 
71; miserable condition of those in China, 71-2; are not ill paid in Great 
Britain, 74; if able to maintain their families in dear years, they must be at 
their ease in plentiful seasons, 74; a proof furnished in the complaints of 
their luxury, 78; why worse paid than artificers, 102; their interests strictly 
connected with the interests of the society, 249; labour the only source of 
their revenue, 262; effects of a life of labour on the understandings of the 
poor, 734. 

[Labourers, statute of, 177.] 

[Lace, £30 worth made of a penny-worth of flax, 631 . 1 

[Lacedaemon, 404-5.] 

[Lancashire, oatmeal diet, 160.] 

Land, [appropriated, 47;] the demand of rent for, how founded, 49; the rent paid, 
enters into the price of the greater part of all commodities, ih,\ generally 
produces more food than will maintain the labour necessary to bring it to 
market, 146; good roads, and navigable canals, equalize difference of situa- 
tion, 147; that employed in raising food for men or cattle, regulates the rent 
of all other cultivated land, 152, 159; can clothe and lodge more than it can 
feed, while uncultivated, and the contrary when improved, 16 1; the culture 
of land producing food, creates a demand for the produce of other lands, 
174; produces by agriculture a much greater quantity of vegetable, than of 
animal food, 187; the full improvement of, requires a stock of cattle to sup- 
ply manure, 221; cause and effect of the diminution of cottagers, 226; signs 
of the land being completely improved, 228; the whole annual produce, or 
the price of it, naturally divides itself into rent, wages, and profits of stock, 
248; the usual price of, depends on the common rate of interest for money, 
340; the profits of cultivation exaggerated by projectors, 355; the cultiva- 
tion of, naturally preferred to trade and manufactures, on equal terms, 
357-8; artificers necessary to the cultivation of, ih,\ was all appropriated, 
though not cultivated, by the northern destroyers of the Roman empire, 
361; origin of the law of primogeniture under the feudal government, il.\ 
entails, 361-2; obstacles to the improvement of land under feudal proprie- 



940 


INDEX 

tors, 364; feudal tenures, 366; feudal taxation, 370; the improvenaent of 
land checked in France by the taiUe, ih.\ occupiers of, labour under great 
disadvantages, ih,\ origin of long leases of, 390; small proprietors, the best 
improvers of, 392; small purchasers of, cannot hope to raise fortunes by 
cultivation, 392. 

Tenures of, in the British American colonies, 538; is the most permanent 
source of revenue, 773,* the rent of a whole country, not equal to the ordi- 
nary levy upon the people, 774; the revenue from, proportioned, not to the 
rent, but to the produce, 775; reasons for selling the crown lands, 775-6; the 
land-tax of Great Britain considered, 780; an improved land-tax suggested, 
782; a land-tax, however equally rated by a general survey, will soon be- 
come unequal, 787; tythes a very unequal tax, 788; tythes discourage im- 
provement, 789; [tax on the sale of, 813; one of the two great sources of 
revenue, 879.] 

Landholders, [love to reap where they never sowed, 49; liberality and ignorance 
of, 144;] why frequently inattentive to their own particular interests, 249; 
how they contribute to the annual production of the land, according to the 
French agricultural system of political oeconomy, 628; should be encour- 
aged to cultivate a part of their own land, 783-4. 

, Land-tax, additional 2s., 410.] 

[Amount of the British, 774; proportioned to rent, 779-88; proportioned 
to produce, 788-91; the British, on houses, 796; cannot raise rents, 799; the 
British, intended to tax stock as well as land, 801; the British, not intended 
to fall on capital, 803; that of the king of Sardinia a tax on land held by 
ignoble tenure, 805; the British, resembles the vingti^me, 809, 855; the 
British, higher on officers, 818; additional is. for three years, 875; may make 
landlord unable to maintain improvements, 880; a more equal, in Great 
Britain might greatly augment the revenue, 886; more could be paid in 
Great Britain if there were no tithe, 887.] 

[Languedoc, 155, 805.] 

[Languedoc canal, 684.] 

[La Riviere, Mercier de, quoted, 643.] 

[Lastage, 374.] 

Latin language, how it became an essential part of university education, 722; [a 
useless smattering sometimes taught in Scotch parish and English charity 
schools, 737 ] 

[Latium, com culture discouraged in, 150.] 

[Laverdy reduced the rate of interest, 90.] 

Law, Mr., account of his banking scheme for the improvement of Scotland, 301; 
quoted, 336. 

Law, the language of, how corrupted, 680; did not improve into a science in 
ancient Greece, 731; remarks on the courts of justice in Greece and Rome, 
ib. 

Lawyers, why amply rewarded for their labour, 106; great amount of their fees, 
677; [few men of fortune eminent as, 717.] 

[Lead smelting company, 715.] 

[Leases, [for iSe, 368;] the various usual conditions of, 782; [registration of, ib,] 
Leather, restrictions on the exportation of, unmanufactured, 619; [real necessary 
of life, 825; duty on, 830.] 

Lectures in universities, frequently improper for instmetion, 720. 

Leeds, 383.] 

Legal tender originally only in the standard of value, 39.] 
leghorn, 44 Sj 446.] 

Legislator contrasted with statesman or politician, 435.] 

Leith, 18, 1 1 7.] 

Lerwick, 117 ] 

Letters, men of, unprosperous race, 13 1; drawn from the universities by the 
large benefices offered by the church, 763.] 

[Levant, 382.] 



INDEX 941 

Levity, the vices of, ruinous to the common people, and therefore severely 
censured by them, 746. 

[Lewis the Fat, 377.] 

Liberty, [perfect, necessary for correspondence of market and natural price, 56* 
62; and for equality of advantages of different employments, 99, 118; fla- 
grantly violated by the laws of settlement, 141;] three duties only necessary 
for a sovereign to attend to, for supporting a system of, 651. 

Licences to consume, Decker’s plan of taxation by, 828.] 

|“Light come light go,” applicable to high profits, 579.] 

Ligue, 588.] 

Lima, computed number of inhabitants in that city, [203-4;] 534. 

Linen manufacture,^ [open to every body, 135;] narrow policy of the master 
manufacturers in, 608-9; [high price in ancient Rome, 648; use of, makes 
soap necessary, 825; duty on Scotch, 866.] 

Lionnois, 168,] 

Liquors dearer owing to taxes, 78; brewed and distilled for private use, 839.] 
Lisbon, gold and silver imported to, 208; both residence of a court and a trading 
dty, 320; gold could easily be brought from, 404; carrying trade example, 
421; bills paid in common currency, 445, 446.] 

[Weekly amount of gold brought from, to London, 513; Vasco de Gama 
sailed from, 526; exorbitant profits at, 578; merchants ma^iificent lords, 

Literature, the rewards of, reduced by competition, 13 1-2; was more profitable 
in ancient Greece, 132-3; the cheapness of literary education an advantage 
to the public, 134. 

[Liverpool represented on the African Company’s committee, 696-7.] 

[Loango, 525,] 

Loans of money, the nature of, analysed, 334; the extensive operation of, 335. 
[Local revenue, the proper source of maintenance for public works and services, 
689, 767; sometimes maintains schools and colleges, 716; p6ages and duties 
of passage formed part of, 845.] 

[Lochabar, 387.] 

[Lochiel, Cameron of, 387.] 

Locke, Mr., remarks on his opinion of the difference between the market and 
mint prices of silver bullion, 43; his account of the cause of lowering the 
rates of interest for money, examined, 336; his distinction between money 
and moveable goods, 399. 

[Locri, 533.] 

Lodgings, cheaper in London, than in any other capital city in Europe, 117. 
Logic, the origin and employment of, 724. 

[Lombardy, 396.] 

[London, road and sea traffic to Edinburgh and Calcutta, 18-9; price of silver, 
38; wages lower than in New York, 70; wages, 75; early decay of carpenters, 
82; bankers pay no interest, 90; great companies borrowed at 5 per cent, 
after the late war, 93; wages of labourers and bricklayers and masons, 103; 
chairmen employed as bricklayers, ih.\ employment from day to day, 104; 
tailors often out of employment, 104; coalheavers, ib.\ wages of common 
labour, ih.] wages of seamen and other labourers compared with those paid 
at Edinburgh, no; lodging cheap, 117-8; silkweavers’ byelaw, 119; counties 
near, petitioned against turnpikes, 147; meat fallen in price compared with 
bread, 15 1 ; societies of merchants buy land in sugar colonies, 157; chairmen, 
porters, coalheavers and prostitutes, Irish, 16 1; stone quarry near, affords 
considerable rent, 163; paving stones from Scotland, 163; civil war raised 
the price of corn, 192-3; price of meat, 220, 225; merchants have not the 
advantage of Scotch cash accounts, 283-4; transactions of Scotch banks, 
287; drawing and redrawing, 294; no bank notes under £10, 306, 307; ex- 
change with Carlisle and Dumfries, 310; residence of a court, but a trading 
city, 320; fire and plague, 328; trade with Scotland, 349; coal trade with 



942 


INDEX 


Newcastle, 352; French cambrics may be imported, 440; exchange with 
Paris. 442; and other foreign towns, 445-6-] 

[Herring fishery company, 488; fifth of gold and silver found in colonies 
reserved to the king in the patent of the London Company, 531; merchants 
not so magnificent as those of Cadiz and Lisbon, nor so parsimonious as 
those of Amsterdam, 579; entrepdt for Gemaan and American trade, 592; 
streets better cared for by local administration, 689; expensive port, 694; 
represented on the committee of the African Company, 696-7; land tax, 
774, 801; windows and rent, 798; porter brewery, 840.] 

London Assurance Company, 714-5.] 

Lorenzo de^ Medici, his trading debts paid by Florence, 771 ] 

Lorraine, 856 ] 

Lotteries, the true nature of, and the causes of their success, explained, 108; 

[silver and gold mining the most disadvantageous in the world, 529.] 
[Lowndes, quoted, 194-S, 444 ] 

[Lucayan Islands, 526 ] 

(Lucca, 381.] 

[Lucerne, tax on the sale of land, 811.] 

[Lucian, quoted, 731.] 

Luck, instances of the universal reliance mankind have on it, 108. 

[Luctuosa hereditas, 810.] 

Lutherans, origin and principles of that sect, 759. 

Luxuries, distinguished from necessaries, 821-2; operation of taxes on, 823; [ex- 
cise duties chiefl.y on, 829; English taxes on, fall chiefly on middle and upper 
ranks, 837; of inferior ranks to be taxed, 838;] the good and bad properties 
of taxes on, 847. 

Lyceum, 731J 
Lycurgus, 404.] 

Lyons, distant from source of materials and destination of manufactures, 345; 

silk manufacture, 382.] 

[Lysias, a teacher, 764.] 

Macedon, Philip of, [liberality to Aristotle, 133;] the superiority that discipline 
gave his army over those of his enemies, 663 
[Machiavel quoted, 381, 742, 771.] 

Machines for facilitating mechanical operations, how invented and improved, 9; 
[men who have received expensive education like, loi;] are advantageous to 
every society, 272. 

[Machpelah, 25.] 

Madder, the cultivation of, long confined to Holland, by English tythes, 789. 
[Madeira, ^25.] 

Madeira wine, how introduced into North America and Britain, 469 
[Madox quoted, 123-4, 374, 376, 377.] 

[Madras, 606, 707, 709.] 

[Madrid, 320J 
[Maese River, 20.] 

Magens, see Me^ens. 

Mahometan nations, high rate of interest among, 96.] 

Maidservants, tax on, in Holland, 809.] 

Majorazzo, 539.] 

Malacca, ^o.] 

Malt, reasons for transferring the duty on brewing to, 840; distillery, how to pre- 
vent smuggling in, 842. 

Malta, the order of, land-tax paid by, in Silesia, 786.] 

Mamelukes, 525.] 

Manchester, 121.] 

Mandarins’ contempt of commerce, 644; embezzle from pa3rments in kind, 790 ] 
Manilla, 207, 209 ] 



INDEX 943 

Manufactures, the great advantage resulting from a division of labour in, 4; in- 
stances in illustration, ii; why profits increase in the higher stages of, 51; of 
what parts the gains of manufacturers consist, 53; the private advantage of 
secrets in manufactures, 60; peculiar advantages of soil and situation, ib.; 
monopolies, 61; corporation privileges, 61, 62; the deductions made from 
labour employed on manufactures, 65; inquiry how far they are affected by 
seasons of plenty and scarcity, 83; are not so materially affected by circum- 
stances in the country where they are carried on, as in the places where they 
are consumed, 85; [price of, more raised by high profits than by high wages, 
97;] new manufactures generally give higher wages than old ones, 114; are 
more profitably carried on in towns than in the open country, 125; by what 
means the prices of, are reduced, while the society continues improving, 
242-3; instances in hard ware, ib.; instances in the woollen manufacture, 
244; what fixed capitals are required to carry on particular manufactures, 
263; for distant sale, why not established in North America, 359; why manu- 
factures are preferred to foreign trade, for the employment of a capital, ib.; 
motives to the establishment of manufactures for distant sale, 381; how 
shifted from one country to another, 381; natural circumstances which 
contribute to the establishment of them, 382; their effect on the government 
and manners of a country, 385; the independence of artisans explained, 390; 
[best commodities wherewith to pay armies in foreign parts, 412;] may 
flourish amidst the ruin of a country, and begin to decay on the return of 
its prosperity, 413; [particular, may be acquired earlier by means of regula- 
tions, 425;] inquiry how far manufactures might be affected by a freedom of 
trade, 435-6; those thrown out of one business can transfer their industry to 
collateral employments, 436; a spirit of combination among them to support 
monopolies, 438. 

Manufacturers prohibited by old statutes from keeping a shop, or selling 
their own goods by retail, 495; the use of wholesale dealers to manufactur- 
ers, 498; British restraints on manufactures in North America, 547, 548; the 
exportation of instruments in, prohibited, 623-4; manufacturers an unpro- 
ductive class of the people, according to the French agricultural system of 
political oeconomy, 630; the error of this doctrine shewn, 638-9; how manu- 
facturers augment the revenue of a country, 642; why the principal support 
of foreign trade, 644; require a more extensive market than rude produce of 
the land, 646; were exercised by slaves in ancient Greece, 647-8; high prices 
of, in Greece and at Rome, 648; false policy to check manufactures in order 
to promote agriculture, 650; in Great Britain why principally fixed in the 
coal countries, 8255 [can lend money to governments, 862 ] 

Manure, the supply of, in most places depends on the stock of cattle raised, 221. 

[Marannon, 542, 543.] 

[Marco Polo, quoted, 526, 527.] 

[Maria Theresa, 786.] 

Maritime countries, why the first that are civilized and improved, 19 

[Marriage, discouraged but not always prevented by poverty, 79; encouraged by 
high wages, 532.] 

[Marseilles treated as foreign by France, 852.] 

Martial spirit, how supported in the ancient republics of Greece and Rome, 738; 
the want of it now supplied by standing armies, ib.; the establishment of a 
militia little able to support it, 739. 

[Maryland, retail stores often belong to residents in England, 347; tobacco ex- 
ports, 467, 561, 568; expense of civil establishment, 541; established by 
Catholics, 555; revenue, 890.] 

[Massachusetts, expense of civil establishment, 540; tax on importation of 
molasses, 888; paper money, 893 ] 

Mazeppa, 414.] 

Meat, see Butchers^ meat.) 

Mechanics should be taught in the parish schools, 737.] 



944 


INDEX 


[Medici, Lorenzo de’, 771.] 

Mediterranean sea, peculiarly favourable for the first attempts in navigation, ig; 
[carries commerce of Europe and Asia, 21; British carrying trade between 
ports of, 354; expense of last war partly laid out in, 410.] 

[Venetian fleets scarcely went beyond, 536; American fish sent to, 545; 
British trade to, partly superseded by the American trade, 563, 564, 574; 
tobacco from America exported to, 569; Gibraltar and Minorca intended to 
protect British trade with, 698.] 

Meggens, Mr., his account of the annual importation of gold and silver into 
Spain and Portugal, 208; his relative proportion of each, 211. 

[MSmoires concernant les droits et impositions en Europe quoted, 770, 772, 782, 
786, 787, 797, 801, 802, 806, 810, 812, 817, 821, 850; more accurate as re- 
gards French taxes than as regards those of other countries, 770 note] 

[Mendicant orders zealous because supported by voluntary oblations, 742.] 

[Menservants, tax on, in Holland, 809.] ^ 

Mercantile system [principles and practice of, 398-626; law for the encourage- 
ment of coinage due to the vulgar prejudices of, 522; mean and malignant 
expedients of, 576-7; raised to splendour by the discovery of America and 
the Cape passage, 590-1; monopoly the sole engine of, 595; encouragement 
of e^orts and discouragement of imports the two great engines of, 607; 
sacrifices consumer to producer, 625; contrived by producers, 626; agree- 
able to a plodding man of business, 627; really encourages manufactures and 
foreign trade, 650;] explained, 831; [not favourable to the annual produce, 
^32 ] 

Mercenary troops, origin and reason of, 657; the numbers of, how limited, ib. 

Merchants, [every man in some measure a merchant, 22; endeavour to suit their 
importation of bullion to the demand, 45; silent with regard to the perni- 
cious effects of their own gains, 98; clamour and sophistry of, 128;] their 
judgments more to be depended on respecting the interests of their particu- 
lar branches of trade, than with regard to the public interest, 249-50; their 
capitals altogether circulating, 263; their dealings extended by the aid of 
bankers notes, 283, 288-9; customs of, first established to supply the want of 
laws, and afterward adirdtted as laws, 293; the manner of negociating bills 
of exchange explained, ih.\ the pernicious tendency of drawing and redraw- 
ing, 294; in what method their capitals are employed, 342; their capitals 
dispersed and unfixed, 345; the principles of foreign trade examined, 353; 
are the best of improvers, when they turn country gentlemen, 384; [not 
citizens of any particular country, 395; listened to because supposed to 
understand trade, 402;] their preference among the different species of trade, 
how determined, 421; [derive greatest advantage from a monopoly of the 
home market, 426;] are actuated by a narrow spirit of monopoly, [429], 460. 

The several branches of the corn trade specified and considered, 49o[-5 10] ; 
the government of a company of, the worst a country can be under, 537; of 
London not good oeconomists, 579; an unproductive class of men, according 
to the present agricultural system of political ceconomy in France, 633; the 
quick return of mercantile capitals enables merchants to advance money to 
government, 862; their capitals increased by lending money to the state, 
863. 

Mercier de la Riviere, M., character of his natural and essential order of political 
societies, 643. 

[Merovingian kings had treasures, 414.] 

[Messance, quoted, 84, 198, 240.] 

Metals, why the best medium of commerce, 23; origin of stamped coins, 25; why 
different metals became the standard of value among different nations, 
38-9; the durability of, the cause of the steadiness of their price, 210; on 
what the quantity of precious metals in every particular countiy depends, 
236; restraints upon the exportation of, 620; [see Gold and Silver.] 

Metaphysics, the science of, explained, 725. 

Metayers, description of the class of farmers so called in France, 366. 



INDEX 


945 


Methodists, the teachers among, why popular preachers, 741. 

Methuen, Mr., translation of the commercial treaty concluded by him between 
England ai;d Portugal, 512; [his treaty obliges the consumer to buy a worse 
commodity from a more distant country, 625-6.] 

[Metz treated as foreign by France, 852.] 

Mexico was a less civilized country than Peru, when first visited by the Span- 
iards, 203; [inferior to China, Japan and Indostan, 416; Cortez attracted to, 
by quest of gold, 529; something like |an Eldorado, 531;] present popu- 
lousness of the capital city, 534-5; low state of arts at the first discovery of 
that empire, 535; [conquest projected by governor of Cuba, 555-6; natives 
^ beyond hunting stage, 599.] 

[Milan surveyed, 786, 887; old church lands rated one third, 787; taxes on bread, 
827; six different provinces with different excises, 853.] 

[Miletus, 533.] 

[Military age, proportion of population within, 656.] 

Militia, why allowed to be formed in cities, and its formidable nature, 378; the 
origin and nature of, explained, 659-60; how distinguished from the regular 
standing army, 660; must always be inferior to a standing army, 66r; a few 
campaigns of service may make a militia equal to a standing army, 662; 
instances, 663. ^ 

Milk, a most perishable commodity, how manufactured for store*, 226. 

Mills, wind and water, their late introduction into England, 246. 

[Mine Adventurers^ Company bankrupt, 715.] 

Mines, distinguished by their fertility or barrenness, 165; comparison between 
those of coal and those of metals, 167; the competition between, extends to 
all parts of the world, ih,‘, the working of, a lottery, 170; diamond mines not 
always worth working, 172-3; tax paid to the king of Spain from the Peru- 
vian mines, 201; the discovery of mines not dependent on human skill or 
industry, 237; in Hungary, why worked at less expence than the neighbour- 
ing ones in Turkey, 648. 

Mining, projects of, uncertain and ruinous, and unfit for legal encouragement, 

529. 

[Minorca, the acquisition of, united the house of Bourbon, 698-9.] 

[Mint, origin of, 25; present hurry of the, 44; operations of, like the web of 
Penelope, 517.] 

[Mint price, 42, 45.] 

Mirabeau, Marquis de, his character of the ceconomical table, 643. 

Mississippi scheme in France, the real foundation of, 302; [fall of, 538, 543.] 
[Mithridates, 664.] 

[Modena, taxes on necessaries, 827,] 

Modus for tythe, a relief to the farmer, 791. 

Molasses, duties on beer made from, 888, 892.] 

'Moluccas, 205, 491, 601, 602; see Spices.] 

Monasteries, destruction of, deprived the poor of charity, 135.] 

Money, the origin of, traced, 23; is the representative of labour, 30; the value of, 
greatly depreciated by the discovery of the American mines, 32; how differ- 
ent metals became the standard money of different nations, 38-9; [money 
makes money, 93; the great wheel of circulation, 273, 276, 280;] the only 
part of the circulating capital of a society, of which the maintenance can 
diminish their neat revenue, 273; makes no part of the revenue of a society, 
274; the term money, in common acceptation, of ambiguous meaning, 
the circulating money in society, no measure of its revenue, 275; paper 
money, 276; the effect of paper, on the circulation of cash, 277; inquiry into 
the proportion the circulating money of any country bears to the annual 
produce circulated by it, 280; paper, can never exceed the value of the cash, 
of which it supplies the place, in any country, 284; the pernicious practice of 
raising money by circulation explained, 294; the true cause of its exporta- 
tion, 323; loans of, the principles of, analysed, 333; monied interest, dis- 
tinguished from the landed and trading interest, 334; inquiry into the real 



946 INDEX 

causes of the reduction of interest, 336; money and wealth synonymous 
terms in popular language, 398; and moveable goods compared, 399; the 
accumulation of, studied by the European nations, 400; the mercantile 
arguments for liberty to export gold and silver, ih.', the validity of these 
arguments examined, 402; money and goods mutually the price of each 
other, 404; over- trading causes complaints of the scarcity of money, 406; 
why more easy to buy goods with money, than to buy money with goods, 
ih.\ [ridiculous to go about to prove that wealth does not consist in, ibr^ 
inquiry into the circulating quantity of, in Great Britain, 410; effect of the 
discovery of the American mines on the value of, 415; money and wealth 
different things, 418; bank money explained, 447; [value in proportion to 
the necessaries it will purchase, 836;] see Coins, Gold, and Silver. 

Monopolies in trade or manufactures, the tendency of, 61; are enemies to good 
management, 147. 

Tendency of making a monopoly of colony trade, 574; countries which have 
colonies, obliged to share their advantages with many other countries, 592; 
the chief engine in the mercantile S5rstem, 595; how monopolies derange the 
natural distribution of the stock of the society, 595-6; are supported by un- 
just and cruel laws, 612; of a temporary nature, how far justifiable, 712; 
perpetual monopolies injurious to the people at large, ih.- [in particular 
produce of land, 844.] 

Montauban, the inequalities in the predial tallie [taille] in that generality, how 
rectified, 787. 

Montesquieu, reasons given by him for the high rates of interest among all 
Mahometan nations, 96; examination of his idea of the cause of lowering the 
rate of interest of money, 336; [quoted, 648, 729.] 

[Montezuma, 535.] 

[Moors in Spain, 380; in Africa, 525.] 

Morality, two different systems of, in every civilized society, 746; the principal 
points of distinction between them, ih.\ the ties of obligation in each system, 
747; why the morals of the common people are more regular in sectaries than 
under the established church, ih.\ the excesses of, how to be corrected, 748. 

[Moral philosophy debased in middle ages, 726.] 

[Moravia, 365.] 

Morellet, M., his account of joint stock companies, defective, 713. 

Mosaical law of inheritance in New England, 539.] 

Mourning, a public, raises the price of black cloth, 59, 116.J 

Mum, tax on, 840,] 

Mun, Mr., his illustration of the operation of money exported for commercial 
purposes, 400. 

[Muscovia, trade with China by caravan, 204; yarn, 608.] 

Music, why a part of the ancient Grecian education, 729; and dancing, great 
amusements among barbarous nations, 729; [not of much consequence in 
forming the Greeks, 732.] 

[Nails, effects of division of labour in making, 7-8; currency in a Scotch village, 

23J 

[Naples, 394.] 

[National debt, see Debts, public, and Funds.] 

Nations, sometimes driven to inhuman customs, by poverty, Iviii; the number 
of useful and productive labourers in, always proportioned to the capital 
stock on which they are employed, ib,] the several sorts of industry, seldom 
dealt with impartially by, lix; maritime nations, why the first improved, 
18; how ruined by a neglect of public oeconomy, 325; evidences of the in- 
crease of a national capital, 326; how the expences of individuals may in- 
crease the national capital, 329. 

[Natural liberty, violations of, unjust, 141, 308, 497; obvious and simple system 
of, 651.]^ 

Navigation, inland, a great means of improving a country in arts and industry, 



INDEX 947 

20; the advantages of, 147; may be successfully managed by joint stock 
companies, 714. 

Navigation act of England, the principal dispositions of, 429-31; motives that 
dictated this law, 430-1; its political and commercial tendency, 431. 

Its consequences, so far as it affected the colony trade with England, 562; 
diminished the foreign trade with Europe, 563; has kept up high profits in 
the British trade, 564; subjects Britain to a disadvantage in every branch of 
trade of which she has not the monopoly, 565; [truly shopkeeper proposal 
enacted in, 580.] 

[Navy bills, 864.] 

Necessaries, [effect of taxes on, 433, 822, 880;] distin^ished from luxuries, 
821-2; operation of taxes on, 822; principal necessaries taxed, 824-5; [value 
of, 836; ought not to be taxed, 839; taxes on, may dimmish landlord’s 
revenue, 880.] 

[Necessaries and conveniences of life, Ivii, Iviii, 30, 33, 159, 880.] 

[Necker, quoted, 856.] 

Negro slaves, why not much employed in raising corn in the English colonies, 
366; why more numerous on sugar, than on tobacco plantations, ib.; [export 
of, to the West Indies unprofitable, 701, 703; taxes on, 808; not worse fed 
than the lower ranks in England, 892.] 

[Negroes on the coast of Africa, drunken, 459; addicted to music and dancing, 
729.] 

[Nemean games, 738.] 

[Newcastle, colliers’ wages, 104; price of coal at, 168; coal trade to London em- 
ploys more shipping than all the carrying trade, 352.] 

[New England, in three provinces the eldest son has a double share, 539; councils 
chosen by the representatives, 552; more republican than England, 552; 
established by the Puritans, 555; progress not foreseen in 1660, 564; exports 
to Great Britain not equal to imports, 894.] 

Newfoundland, dried cod currency, 23.] 

New Granada, 203.] 

New Hampshire, cost of civil establishment, 540.] 

New Jersey, established by Swedes, 536; progress obstructed by Dutch exclu- 
sive company, 537; cost of civil establishment, 540; possessed by the Dutch 
in 1660, 564; exports to Great Britain less than imports, 894.] 

[New York province, high wages, 69-70; free labour found cheaper than slave, 81 ; 
swallowed up New Jersey and was acquired by England, 536-7; progress ob- 
structed by Dutch exclusive company, 537; expense of civil establishment, 
540; possessed by the Dutch in 1660, 564; exports to Great Britain less than 
imports, 894.] 

[New York City, second great town of the English colonies, 535.] 

[Nicuessa, 529.] 

[Nightingale, a white, extravagant price paid for, 219.] 

Nile, river, the cause of the early improvement of agriculture and manufactures 
in Egypt, 20; [famous irrigation works on, 646.] 

Nimeguen, peace of, 434.] 

Norfolk, master weavers restricted to two apprentices, 119.] 

Norman lords, their jurisdiction no greater than that of the Saxons, 387.] 
Normandy, 852.] 

North Carolina, expense of civil establishment, 541 ; revenue, 890.] 
Northumberland, Earl of, his household book, 179; mountains destined to be 
breeding country, 427.] 

North-west passage, 531.] 

Norway exempted from Eastland Company’s monopoly, 693.] 

Norwich, master weavers restricted to two apprentices, 119.] 

Nova Belgia divided into New York and New Jersey, 537.] 

Nova Tahida, demand of Roman poor for, 884.] 

Nova Scotia, expense of civil establishment, 540.] 

Nugnes de Balboa, Vasco, 529.] 



INDEX 


948 

[Nuremberg, bank of, 447.] 

[Oatmeal, principal and best food of Scotch common people, 76. J 
Oats, bread made of, not so suitable to the human constitution, as that made of 
wheat, 1 60- 1. 

[Oceana as likely as free trade in Great Britain, 437.] 

[OEconomical Table, 637.] 

CEconomists, sect of, in France, their political tenets, 627-43; [recommend a tax 
on rent varjdng with the rent, 782.] 

(Economy of the rich, disorders usually established in, 81.] 

Offices, salaries of public, taxable, 818.] 

Oieda, 329.] 

Olympic games, 738.] 

Ontology, the science of, explained, 726. 

Optional clause, 309.] 

Orleans, Duke of, 302.] 

Ortolans, fattened in France, 224.] 

Overtrading occurs when profits are unusually high, 406.] 

Oxford, the professorships there, sinecures^ 718. 

[Oxfordshire, coal and wood mixed, 166.] 

[Palladius quoted, 153.] 

[Palos, 526.1 

Paper money, the credit of, how established, 277; the operation of paper money 
explained, ih.\ its effect on the circulation of cash, ih.\ promotes industry, 
279; operation of the several banking companies established in Scotland, 
281; can never exceed the value of the gold and silver, of which it supplies 
the place, in any country, 284; consequences of too much paper being issued, 
285; the practice of drawing and redrawing explained, with its pernicious 
effects, 293-4; the advantages and disadvantages of paper credit slated, 305; 
ill effects of notes issued for small sums, 306-7; suppressing small notes, 
renders money more plentiful, 307; the currency of, does not affect the 
prices of goods, 308-9; account of the paper currency in North America, 310; 
expedient of the government of Pennsylvania to raise money, 310-11, 772; 
why convenient for the domestic purposes of the North Americans, 893. 
[Paraguay, 203.] 

Paris, [lodging dearer than in London, 117-8; workman serves five years as ap- 
prentice and five more as journeyman, 121; Rouen the entrep6t of goods for, 
319;] enjoys little more trade than is necessary for the consumption of its in- 
habitants, 320; [exchange with London, 442.] 

[Custom of, with regard to inheritance, followed in the colonies, 539; de- 
fended itself against Henry IV., 588; parliament of, 751.] 

Parish ministers, evils attending vesting the election of, in the people, 760. 
[Parliament, intimidated by private interests, 438; managed by the sovereign, 
583, 751; might be extended to the colonies, 886.] 

[Parliaments, the French, little trade in the towns where they are, 319; court fees 
and salaries, 678; that of Paris managed by Choiseul, 751 ; memoir of that of 
Bordeaux quoted, 870.] 

[Parma, taxes on bread, 827; several provinces with separate excises, 853.] 
Parsimony is the immediate cause of the increase of capitals, 321; promotes 
industry, 322; frugal men public benefactors, 324; [destroyed by high 
profits, 578;] is the only means by which artificers and manufacturers can 
add to the revenue and wealth of society, according to the French agri- 
cultural system of political oeconomy, 632. 

[PartljiaiM, 665.] 

[Passage duties, 373-4, 845.] 

Pasture land, [not so productive as corn-fields, 148;] under what circumstances 
more profitable than arable land, 149; why it ought to be inclosed, 150. 
[Patents, justification of, 712.] 



INDEX 


949 


Patronage, the right of, why established in Scotland, 761. 

[Pawnshop, public, at Hamburg, 772.] 

Pay, military, origin and reason of, 656. 

Plages, 767, 845.] 

Pedlars, tax on, 804.] 

Pekin, caravans from Muscovy to, 204.] 

Pelham, Mr., quoted, 199; redeemed six millions of debt, 874-5.] 
Peloponnesians served in war without pay, 656.] 

Peltry, 162.] 

Penelope, 517.] 

Pennsylvania, account of the paper currency there, 310-11, 772, 893; [Quakers 
liberated their slaves, 366.] 

[No right of primogeniture, 539; expense of civil establishment, 540; 
established by Quakers, 555; not planted in 1660, 564;] good consequences 
of the government there having no religious establishment, 745; derive a 
revenue from their paper currency, [772], 893; [imports from Great Britain 
exceed exports, 894.] 

[Pensions, a derivative revenue, 53; value of, equal to their power of purchasing, 

275-6.] 

People, how divided into productive and unproductive classes, according to the 
present French system of agricultural political oeconomy, 628-9; unpro- 

ductive class, greatly useful to the others, 633; the great body of, how ren- 
dered unwarlike, 659; the difierent opportunities of education in the dif- 
ferent ranks of, 736-7; the inferior ranks of, the greatest consumers, 838; the 
luxurious expences of these ranks ought only to be taxed, 839. 
[Perpetuities abhorred by English common law, 363; different kinds of, prevent 
division of great estates in Europe, 392.] 

Persecution for religious opinions, the true cause of, 741. 

[Persia, Gulf of, 21; many servants but few soldiers at the court of, 414-5; militia 
defeated by the Greek militia, 666.] 

Peru, the discovery of the silver mines in, occasioned those in Europe to be in a 
great measure abandoned, 168; these mines yield but small profit to the 
proprietors, ih.\ tax paid to the king of Spain from these mines, [169, 170,] 
201; the early accounts of the splendor and state of arts in this country, 
greatly exaggerated, 203; present state of, under the Spanish government, 
ih.] the working of the mines there become gradually more expensive, 214-5; 
[food, clothing and lodging the price paid for gold and silver, 324; silver of, 
351, 404, 458; less rich than China, jfapan or Indostan, 416.] 

[Reason for conquest of, 529; like an Eldorado, 531;] low state of arts 
there when first discovered, 535; is probably more populous now, than at any 
former period, ih.\ [sums spent in receiving a new viceroy, 541; little con- 
tributed by Spain, 556; natives beyond the hunting stage, 599.] 

Peter the Great, his great reform the creation of a standing army, 667.] 

Pfeffel quoted, 374, note 6, 376, note ii.] 

Philadelphia, high wages. Si; third greatest city of the English colonies, 535.] 
Philip of Macedon, 133, 663.] 

Philip I. of France, 377.] 

Philosophical and Political History ^ quoted, 209, see Raynal.j 
Philosophy [subdivided, 10; philosopher not very different by nature from a 
porter, 15,] 

Natural, the origin and objects of, 723; moral, the nature of, explained, 
723-4; logic, the origin and employment of, 724; [study of, should be uni- 
versal among middle and upper ranks, 748; nothing so absurd as not to have 
been asserted by some, 827,] 

[Phocyllidcs, 724.] 

[Phoenicians long feared to sail beyond Gibraltar, 20.] 

Physicians, why amply rewarded for their labour, 105. 

Physics, the ancient system of, explained, 725. 

[Picardy, 852.] 



INDEX 


950 

Piecework leads to overwork, 81-2.] 

[Piedmont, 786 ] 

Pinmaking, tke extraordinary advantage of a division of labour in this art, 4, 
Pisa, shipping encouraged by the crusades, 380.] 

Pizarro, 529.] 

Placentia bread- taxes, 827 ] 

Plano Carpini, quoted, 398.] 

Plate River, 148 ] 

Plate [sterling mark on, gives greater security than apprenticeship, 122; annual 
consumption of, 207;] of private families, the melting it down to supply state 
exigencies, an insignificant resource, 410; profusion of, in Spanish and Por- 
tuguese houses, 479; new plate is chiefly made from old, 516; [tax on, most 
conveniently paid as an annuity, 827.] 

[Plato, quoted, 133, 365, 729; the Academy assigned to, 731; a teacher, 764.] 
[Play for nothing, better than to work for nothing, 319.] 

[Pliny, quoted, 24, 39, 219, 365, 649.] 

Ploughmen, their knowledge more extensive than the generality of mechanics, 
127. 

[Plutarch, quoted, 133; a teacher, 764 J 
[Plymouth Company, 531, 543.] 

Pneumatics, the science of, explained, 726. 

Pneumatology, 726.] 

Po River, transit duties, 845.] 

Poacher everywhere in Great Britain a very poor man, 10 1.] 

Pocock, Dr., quoted, 386.] 

Poivre, M., his account of the agriculture of Cochin China, 156. 

Poland, [corn as cheap as that of France, 6; disorders have raised the price of 
corn, 198;] a country still kept in poverty by the feudal system of its gov- 
ernment, 238; [annual produce declining, 241; trade, 351; serfs still exist in, 
36s; corn exchanged for wines and brandies of France, 380 ] 

[Industry encouraged by colonisation of America, 557; partition and 
pacification of, 573; Russian invasion, 666.] 

[Police, regulations of, keep market price above natural, 59, 62; violent, of Indo- 
stan and ancient Egypt, ih.\ rules of, consequent on statute of apprentice- 
ship, 1 20-1; laws of settlement the greatest disorder of, in England, 135; 
wrong regulation of, not likely to be advised by landlords, 249.J 
[Vigilant and severe, will not retain gold and silver in Spain and Portugal, 
479; of Spain and Portugal lowers value of precious metals there, 508; main- 
tenance of roads and canals a branch of, 688; particular town or district 
should pay for its own, 767.] 

[Police of grain, quoted, 180, 198, see Herbert.] 

[Policy of Europe, favourable to the industry of towns, lix, 644; nowhere 
leaves things at perfect liberty, 99, 118; considers country labour as com- 
mon labour, loi.] 

[Political arithmetic, Gregory King’s skill in, 77; author has no great faith in, 
SOI-] 

Political ceconomy, [private interests and prejudices of particular orders of men 
have given occasion to different theories of, lix; system of, which repre- 
sents national wealth as consisting in abundance of gold and silver, 237-8, 
399; the great object of, is to increase the riches and power of the country, 
352;] the two distinct objects, and two different systems of, 397; [Mun’s 
title a maxim in the, of England and other countries, 403; under the mer- 
cantile system, object of, to diminish imports and increase exports, 418.] 
The present agricultural system of, adopted by French philosophers, 
described, 627; classes of the people who contribute to the annual produce 
of the land, 628; how proprietors contribute, 629; how cultivators contri- 
bute, ih,\ artificers and manufacturers, unproductive, 630; the unproductive 
classes maintained by the others, 633; bad tendency of restrictions and pro- 
hibitions in trade, 636; how this system is delineated by M. Quesnai, 637; 



INDEX 951 

the bad efiEects of an injudicious political oeconomy, how corrected, 638; the 
capital error in this system pointed out, ih.] [this system the best yet pub- 
lished on the subject of, 642; very important science, ib.; deals with the 
nature and causes of the wealth of nations, 643; of Europe favours manu- 
factures and foreign trade, ih.\ to promote cheapness and encourage produc- 
tion, the great business of, 706; Morellet’s great knowledge of, 713.] 
[Politician, insidious and crafty animal, 435.] 

Poll taxes, origin of, under the feudal government, 374; [on negro slaves, a tax on 
particular profits, 808;] why esteemed badges of slavery, ib.; the nature of, 
considered, 818-9; [French, 855.] 

Polybius, quoted, 729, 732.] 

Pondicheriy, 707.] 

Pondo, 26.] 

Pontage, 374.] 

Poor, history of the laws made for the provision of, in England, 135-6; [see Settle- 
ment.] 

Pope of Rome, the great power formerly assumed by, 752; his power how re- 
duced, 755; rapid progress of the reformation, 757. 

Population, riches and extreme poverty equally unfavourable to, 79; is limited 
by the means of subsistence, 79-80, 163; [encouraged by high wages in 
colonies, 533; taxation of luxuries of the poor, no discouragement to the 
increase of useful, 823.] 

[Porr6e, Father, 763,] 

Porter, [tax on, has not raised wages, 823; price of a pot of, 828;] the proportion 
of malt used in the brewing of, 840. 

[Porters, compared with philosophers, 15; can only find employment in a town, 
17; Irish, in London, 16 1.] 

(Portico assigned to Zeno, 731.] 

[Porto Bello, 704.] 

Portugal, [small part of Europe, 202; in i6th century the only nation regularly 
trading with East Indies, 204; lost that trade to the Dutch, ih., 417; annual 
produce of land and labour declining, 241; trade with Britain, 349; and with 
Poland, 352;] the cultivation of the country not advanced by its commerce, 
395; [expense of last war laid out in, 410; British duties on wines, 440, 460; 
foreign trade, 441.] 

The value of gold and silver there, depreciated by prohibiting their ex- 
portation, 478; translation of the commercial treaty concluded in 1703 with 
England, 513; a large share of the Portugal gold sent annually to England, 
ib.-f [examination of the advantages of the trade with, to Great Britain, 
514-6;] motives that led to the discovery of a i>assage to the East round the 
Cape of Good Hope, 525-6; [settlement of Brazil, 535-6; exclusive companies 
recently established for Pernambuco and Marannon, 542; prohibition of 
import of tobacco except from the colonies, 549; banished Jews to Brazil, 
555;] lost its manufactures by acquiring rich and fertile colonies, 575; 
[trade with East Indies open, 595; and none the less prosperous, 598, 599; 
African colonies resemble the American, though there is no exclusive com- 
pany, 599; summary of effect of Methuen treaty, 625-6; slave trade un- 
profitable, 703; see Spain and Portugal.] 

[Postlethwayt, quoted, 302, note 24; 874.] 

Post-office, [affords a revenue to the state, 682;] a mercantile project well calcu- 
lated for being managed by a government, 770. 

Potatoes, remarks on, as an article of food, 160; culture, and great produce of, 
ih.\ the difficulty of preserving them the great obstacle to cultivating them 
for general diet, 161. 

[Potosi, mines of, 148, 191, 201,] 

[Pots and pans, 408.] 

Poultry, the cause of their cheapness, 224; is a more important article of rural 
oeconomy in France than in England, 225. 

[Pounds, various, 26-7; accounts kept in, 39.] 



952 INDEX 

Poverty sometimes urges nations to inhuman customs, Iviii; is no check to the 
production of chhdren, 79; but very unfavourable to raising them, 79. 

Pragmatic sanction in France, the object of, 756; is followed by the concordat, 
ib. 

Preferments, ecclesiastical, the means by which a national clergy ought to be 
managed by the civil magistrate, 750; alterations in the mode of electing to 
them, 751-2, 756. 

Presbyterian church government, the nature of, described, 761; character of the 
clergy of, 762, 765; [countries exempt from tithe, 789.] 

[Present State of the Nation, quoted, 4ri.] 

[Press-gang, 115.] 

Prices, [natural, real, market, and nominal, 28, 30-46, 55-63;] real and nonainal, 
of commodities distinguished, 33-4; [of labour, 35, 146, 200;] money price of 
goods explained, 46; [component parts of, 47-54;] for land enters into 
the price of the greater part of all commodities, 49; the component parts of 
the prices of goods explained, 50; natural and market prices distinguished, 
and how governed, 55-6, [62,] 86. 

Though raised at first by an increase of demand, are always reduced by it 
in the result, 706; [of necessaries and labour, 815-6, 836,] 

Primogeniture, origin and motive of the law of succession by, under the feudal 
government, 361-2; is contrary to the real interests of families, 362; [ob- 
structs improvement in Europe, 392; none in Pennsylvania, and restricted 
in New England, 539.] 

Princes, why not well calculated to manage mercantile projects for the sake of a 
revenue, 771. 

Prodigality, the natural tendency of, both to the individual and to the public, 
322; prodigal men enemies to their country, 324. 

Produce of land and labour, the source of all revenue, 315-6; the value of, how to 
be increased, 326. 

[Production, consumption the sole object of, 625.] 

[Productive, and useful labourers proportioned to stock, Iviii; and tmproduc- 
tive, 314-32.] 

Professors in universities, circumstances which determine their merit, 762-3. 

Profit, [must be obtained by the undertaker who hazards his stock, 48; not mere- 
ly a different name for wages of direction, ih.\ one of three original sources of 
revenue, 52;] the various articles of gain that pass under the common idea 
of, 53; [sometimes included in wages, «&.;] an average rate of, in all countries, 
55; [how affected by fluctuations of prices, 59; name usually given to gains 
resulting from possession of secrets in trade, 60; raised by monopolies and 
corporation laws, 61; depends on price of provisions, 83; general theory of, 
87-98;] averages of, extremely difficult to ascertain, 87; interest of money 
the best standard of, 88; the diminution of, a natural consequence of pros- 
perity, gi; clear and gross profit, distin^ished, 96; the nature of the highest 
ordinary rate of, defined, ib.; double interest, deemed in Great Britain a 
reasonable mercantile profit, 97; in thriving countries, low profit may com- 
pensate the high wages of labour, ib.; the operation of high profits and high 
wages, compared, ib.; [inequalities of, between different occupations, 99- 
143;] compensates inconveniencies and disgrace, loi; of stock, how affected, 
[by the five circumstances which cause differences of wages,] ib.; large 
profits must be made from small capitals, 1 12; why goods are cheaper in the 
metropolis than in country villages, ib.; great fortunes more frequently 
made by trade in large towns than in small ones, 113; [high, a cause of high 
prices, 146; a charge which comes before rent, 146; lower in remote country 
than in great towns, 147;] is naturally low in rich, and high in poor coun- 
tries, 249-50; how that of the different classes of traders is raised, 343; 
private, the sole motive of employing capitals in any branch of business, 
355 . 

[Kept up in British trade by the colonial monopoly, 564; high, subjects a 
country to a disadvantage in trade, ib.; and discourages improvement of 



INDEX 


953 

land, 577;] when raised by monopolies, encourages luxury, [high rate every- 
where destroys parsimony,] 578; small republics derive considerable revenue 
from, 769; one of three sources of private revenue, 777; surplus over interest 
not taxable, 798; taxes on, 798-803; taxes on particular, 803-9; custom 
duties originally intended as a tax on, 829.] 

[Progressive state best for the body of the people, 81.] 

Projects, unsuccessful, in arts, injurious to a country, 324. 

Property, [of a man in his own labour, the foundation of all other, 121; sacred 
rights of, 170;] passions which prompt mankind to the invasion of, 670; civil 
government necessary for the protection of, ih.\ wealth a source of author- 
ity, 671, 673. 

Proprietor, a great, seldom a great improver, 363.] 

Prosperity, does not usually last more than 200 years, 394.] 

Prostitutes, Irish, in London, 161.] 

Protagoras, lived in splendour, 133; went from place to place, 730.] 

Provence, taille in, 805.] 

Proverbs of Solomon, 724.] 

Provisions, how far the variations in the price of, affect labour and industry, 74, 
83, 85; whether cheaper in the metropolis, or in country villages, 1 13; the 
prices of, better regulated by competition than by law, 142; [parliamentary 
inquiry into the causes of the high price of, 151;] a rise in the prices of, must 
be uniform, to shew that it proceeds from a depreciation of the value of 
silver, 240; [price of, and wages, 815-6, 836.] 

Provisors, object of the statute of, in England, 756. 

Prussia, [king of, accumulates treasure, 410, 861; acknowledged superiority of 
troops, 661; troops veteran, 666;] mode of assessing the land-tax there, 786; 
[survey and valuation, 786-7, 887.] 

[Public good, not much good done by those who affect to trade for the, 423.] 
[Public schools, the English, less corrupted than the universities, 721.] 

Public works and institutions, how to be maintained, 681; equity of tolls for pas- 
sage over roads, bridges, and canals, 683; why government ought not to 
have the management of turnpikes, 685; nor of other public works, 689; 
[deficiencies in the receipts from, must be made good from taxes, 768; six 
days’ labour originally sufficient for all, 773.] 

[Puritans founded New England, 555.] 

Purveyance, a service still exacted in most parts of Europe, 370. 

[Pythagoras, school of, established in a colony, 533.] 

Quakers of Pennsylvania, inference from their resolution to emancipate all their 
negro slaves, 366; [established the colony, 555; in a majority there, 745.] 
Quesnai, M., view of his agricultural system of political oeconomy, 637; his 
doctrine generally subscribed to, 643 
[Quintilian, a teacher, 764.] 

Quito, populousness of that city, 534. 

Racked rent takes part of the farmer’s share, 630.] 

Raleigh, his dream of an Eldorado, 530.] 

Ramazzini, his book on the diseases of workmen, 82.] 

Rates, the Book of, 505, 623, 831, 834.] 

Raynal, quoted, 209.] 

Recoinage, of gold, 41; of silver, under William III., 195, 864.] 

Recovery, common, 368.] 

Reformateur, Lc, quoted, 827.] 

Reformation, rapid progress of the doctrines of, in Gerniany, 757; in Sweden and 
Switzerland, 758; in England and Scotland, ih.) origin of the Lutheran and 
Calvinistic sects, 759. 

[Reformers found Greek and Hebrew versions more favourable than the Latin, 
722 - 3 -] 



954 


INDEX 


[Regiam majestatem, quoted, 183.] 

[Registration, duties on, 810, 813, 814.] 

Regulated companies, see Companies. 

[Relief, a feudal casualty once a source of public revenue, 81 1.] 

Religion, [corn laws resemble laws respecting, 507,* instruction in, 740-66;] the 
object of instruction in, 740; advantage the teachers of a new religion enjoy 
over those of one that is established, ib.\ origin of persecution for heretical 
opinions, 741; how the zeal of the inferior clergy of the church of Rome is 
kept alive, ib.) utility of ecclesiastical establishments, 743; how united with 
the civil power, 744; [instruction in, may be paid from taxes without in- 
justice, 768.] 

Rent, reserved, ought not to consist of money, 34; but of corn, 35; of land, 
constitutes a third part of the price of most lands of goods, 49; [sometimes 
confounded with profit, 53;] an average rate of, in all countries, and how 
regulated, 55; [less affected by fluctuations of prices than wages and profit, 
59; of particular vineyards, 61; causes which regulate, 63;] makes the first 
deduction from the produce of labour employed upon land, 65; [depends on 
price of provisions, 83; highest rate of profit eats up, 97;] the terms of, how 
adjusted between landlord and tenant, 144; is sometimes demanded for 
what is altogether incapable of human improvement, 145; is paid for, and 
produced by, land in almost all situations, 146; [varies with fertility, 147; of 
rice lands, 159;] the general proportion paid for coal mines, 167; and metal 
mines, 168; mines of precious stones frequently yield no rent, 172; [rent of 
mines in proportion to relative, but land rent in proportion to absolute 
fertility, 173;] how paid in ancient times, 181; is raised, either directly or 
indirectly, by every mprovement in the circumstances of society, 247; 
gross and neat rent distinguished, 270; how raised and paid under feudal 
government, 318; present average proportion of, compared with the produce 
of the land, w. ^ 

[In Great Britain, estimate of the amount of, 775; one third of the pro- 
duce, ih.; revenue of the people not proportioned to, i6.;] of houses distin- 
guished into two parts, 791; difference between rent of houses, and rent of 
land, 794; rent of a house the best estimate of a tenant’s circumstances, ih,} 
[house-rent taxable under the land-tax, 796.] 

Rents (French rentes), 809.] 

Representation unknown in ancient times, 588.] 

Republican government supports the grandeur of Holland, 857-8.] 

Retainers, under the feudal system of government, described, 385[-9i]; how the 
connexion between them and their lords was broken, 388. 

[Retaliation, whm expedient, 434.] 

Revenue, iJbe original sources of, pointed out, 52; [777, 879;] of a country, of 
what it consists, 270; the neat revenue of a society diminished by supporting 
a circulating stock of money, 273; money no part of revenue, 274; is not to 
be computed in money, but in what money will purchase, 275; how pro- 
duced, and how appropriated, in the first instance, 316; produce of land, ih.; 
produce of manufactures, ih,} must always replace capital, ih,} the propor- 
tion between revenue and capital, regulates the proportion between idleness 
and industry, 320-1; both the savings and the spendings of, annually con- 
sumed, 321; of every society, equal to the exchangeable value of the whole 
produce of its industry, 423. 

Of the customs, increased by drawbacks, 470; [severity of the laws for the 
security of the, 612;] why government ought not to take the management of 
turnpikes, to derive a revenue from them, 685; public works of a local 
nature, always better maintained by provincial revenues, than by the 
general revenue of the state, 689; the abuses in provincial revenues trifling, 
when compared with those in the revenue of a great empire, ih.} the greater 
the revenue of the church, the smaller must be that of the state, 765; the 
revenue of the state ought to be raised proportionably from the whole 
society, 767; local expences ought to be defrayed by a local revenue, ih • 



INDEX 


955 


inquiry into the sources of public revenue, 769; of the republic of Ham- 
burgh, 769-70, 772; whether the government of Britain could undertake the 
management of the Bank, to derive a revenue from it, 770; the Post-offi.ce a 
mercantile project well calculated for being managed by government, ih . ; 
princes not well qualified to improve their fortunes by trade, 771; the 
English East India Company good traders before they became sovereigns, 
but each character now spoils the other, 771; expedient of the government 
of Pennsylvania to raise money, 772; rent of land, the most permanent fund, 
773; feudal revenues, ih.; Great Britain, 774; revenue from land propor- 
tioned, not to the rent, but to the produce, 775; reasons for selling the crown 
lands, 775-6; an improved land-tax suggested, 782; the nature and effect of 
tythes explained, 788; why a revenue cannot be raised in kind, 790; when 
raised in money, how affected by different modes of valuation, ih.; a pro- 
portionable tax on houses, the best source of revenue, 794; remedies for the 
diminution of, according to their causes, 835; bad effects of farming out 
public revenues, 853; the different sources of revenue in France, 855; how 
expended, in the rude state of society, 859. 

Revolution, the, of 1688, 864.] 

Rhine, 20.] 

Rhode Island expense of civil establishment, 540; representatives elected the 
governor, 552.] 

Rice, a very productive article of cultivation, 159; requires a soil unfit for raising 
any other kind of food, ih.; rice countries more populous than corn coun- 
tries, 205. 

Riches, [measured by the necessaries, conveniences and amusements which can 
be enjoyed, 30;] the chief enjoyment of, consists in the parade of, 172. 

Rich man consumes no more food than the poor, 164.] 

Riding school ineflficient because generally a public institution, 721.] 

Riga. 35 °, 443J 

Riquet, Languedoc Canal entmsted to, 684 ] 

Risk, instances of the inattention mankind pay to it, 108. 

[Rivers, earliest improvements of industry on the banks of, 18; benefit remote 
parts of the country, 147.] 

Roads, good, the public advantages of, 147; [anciently maintained by compul- 
soiy labour, 370,] 

How to be made and maintained, 682[-9;] the maintenance of, why im- 
proper to be trusted to private interest, 684; general state of, in France, 687; 
in China, 687-8; [may not unjustly be paid for from taxes, 767; anciently 
maintained by six days’ labour, 773; good in ancient Bengal and Egypt, 
7S9-] 

[Robert Capet, 756.] 

[Roman Catholic, see Rome, modern.] 

[Roman law developed with respect to precedent, 732; position of emancipated 
children, 81 1.] 

Romans [had no coined money till the time of Servius Tullius, 24, 26;] why 
copper became the standard of value among them, 39; [incorporated trades, 
1 19; no apprentices, 122-3; Athenian philosophers, ambassadors to, 134; 
corn chiefly imported, 150; cultivation discouraged by low price of corn, ih.; 
silver mines worked by, 181;] the extravagant prices paid by them for 
certain luxuries for the table, accounted for, 218; the value of silver higher 
among them than at the present time, ib.; [fall of Western empire, 361; no 
right of primogeniture, ih.; entails unknown among, 363; slavery harsher 
than in mediaeval Europe, 364.] 

[Colonisation by, 523-5;] the republic of, founded on a division of land 
among the citizens, 523-4; the agrarian law only executed upon one or two 
occasions, ih.; [cultivation by slaves, ih.i\ how the citizens who had no land, 
subsisted, ih.; distinction between the Roman and Greek colonies, 525; the 
improvement of the former slower than that of the latter, 533; [dependency 
of the former on the mother state, 534; slaves more protected under the 



956 INDEX 

emperors, 554; colonies furnished both men and money, 559;] origin of the 
social war, 587; the republic ruined by extending the privilege of Roman 
citizens to the greater part of the inhabitants of Italy, [587,] 589; [wisdom of 
the senate, 606; discouraged manufactures and foreign trade, 647; used 
slave labour in manufactures, 648; the pound, 649;] when contributions 
were first raised to maintain those who went to the wars, 656; [Campus 
Martius, 658;] soldiers not a distinct profession there, ib.; [elevation of, the 
second great historical revolution, 66 $) Carthaginian wars, 663-4;] improve- 
ment of the Roman armies by discipline, 664; how that discipline was lost, 
665; the fall of the Western empire, how effected, 666; [abandonment of 
personal administration of justice by the consul, 680;] remarks on the edu- 
cation of the ancient Romans, 729; their morals superior to those of the 
Greeks, 729; [teachers of militaiy exercises not paid by the state, ib., 738;] 
state of law and forms of justice, 731; [equal to any modern people in 
ability, 732;] the martial spirit of the people, how supported, 738; [eminent 
men of letters were teachers, 764; comfortable without linen, 821;] great 
reductions of the coin practised by, at particular exigencies, 883-4; [poor 
people in debt to the rich and demanded new tables, 884.] 

Rome, modern [i.e. church of, pay of priests in England, 130; claims merit as to 
the emancipation of serfs, 367.] 

[Clergy obliged to study Greek and Hebrew, 722-3; demanded persecu- 
tion of Protestants, 741;] how the zeal of the inferior clergy of, is kept alive, 
ib.; [turbulent, 750;] the clergy of, one great spiritual army dispersed in 
different quarters over Europe, 752; their power during the feudal monkish 
ages similar to that of the temporal barons, 753; [most formidable combina- 
tion against civil government, 754;] their power how reduced, 755; [richest 
church in Christendom, 763.] 

[Rome, modern city of, residence of a court and consequently idle, 319.] 

Rouen, [statistics of silk and linen manufacture in the generality of, 84;] why a 
town of great trade [though the seat of a parliament], 319. 

Rouge, Cape, 696, 697, 698.] 

Royal Caroline, 703.] 

Royal Exchange Assurance Company, 714-5.] 

Ruddiman, Mr., remarks on his account of the ancient price of wheat in Scot- 
land, 183; [quoted, 213, 281.] 

[Ruffhead, his edition of the statutes, 183.] 

[Rum, and molasses expected to defray cost of sugar cultivation, 157; foreign 
article of common use, 834; excise duties, 835; proper subject of taxation, 
889, 892,] 

Russia, [improvement since the discovery of America, 202; serfs still exist in, 
365; peace with Turkey, 573; fleet in the Archipelago, ib,; soldiers not in- 
ferior to the Prussian, 666;] was civilized under Peter I. by a standing army, 
667; [early embassies to, 690.] 

[Russian Company, 692-3.] 

Sailors, why no sensible inconvenience felt by the great numbers disbanded at 
the close of a war, 436. 

[Saint Christopher island, half in possession of the French in 1660, 564; com- 
pletely cultivated, 895.] 

[Saint Domingo, mines abandoned, 168; Columbus in, 526, 528; stock accumu- 
lated in, 554.] 

^Saint Jameses Palace, land-tax on, 774.] 

Saint-Maur, Dupr6 de, quoted, 180, 185, 198, 240.] 

5aint Thomas island, Danish settlement, 537.] 

Saint Vincent, new field for speculation, 895.] 

Sallee, 697.] 

Salmon fishery pays a rent, 51.] 

Salt [currency in Abyssinia, 23; dearer on account of the tax, 78;] account of 
foreign salt imported into Scotland, and of Scots salt delivered duty free, 



INDEX 957 

for the fishery, [485;] Append., 903; is an object of heavy taxation every- 
where, 825; the collection of the duty on, expensive, 847; [the French tax 
on, 852, 854.] 

Sandi, quoted, 381.] 

San Domingo, see Saint Domingo.] 

Santa Cruz island, Danish settlement, 537,] 

Saracens, 380.] 

Sardinia, the land-tax how assessed there, 787, [805, 887.] 

[Savoy surveyed, 786.] 

Saxon lords, their authority and jurisdiction as great before conquest, as those of 
the Normans were afterward, 387. 

[Scandinavians, the ancient, practised music and dancing, 730.] 

[Scarcity, effect of years of, on industry and wages, 82-3, 85-6 ] 

[Scholarships, effect of, on earnings of labour, 129, 132.] 

Schools, [English public, 721;] parochial, observations on, 737; [charity, ih] 
Science, is the great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and superstition, 748. 
Scipio, his Spanish militia, rendered superior to the Carthaginian militia by 
discipline and service, 664. 

Scotland, [in the Highlands every farmer a butcher, etc., 17; village in, where 
nails are currency, 23; reduction of value of the coin, 27, 35; wages in low 
country vary less than in England, 75;] compared with England, as to the 
prices of labour and provisions, 75-6; [grain dearer in 17th century, 76; 
wages in 17th century sd. to 6d., ih.-, wages in different parts, ib.'] remarks 
on the population of the Highlands, 79; [workmen less diligent than in Eng- 
land, 81; linen manufacture, 84;] the market rate of interest, higher than 
the legal rate, 90; [wages lower than in England, ih.', much poorer and ad- 
vancing less rapidly than England, ib., 189; wages of colliers and common 
labourers compared, 104;] the situation of cottagers there, described, 116; 
[knitted stockings in many places cheaper than woven, 117; wages of spin- 
ners, i6.;] apprenticeships and corporations, 12 1; [church, ^ respectable 
though poorly paid, 13 1; easy migration of labour, 140; assize of bread 
could not be fixed there, 142; incorporation of bakers in, ih.', rent for kelp 
shores, 145; desert moors yield rent, 146; union with, opened English mar- 
ket to cattle of, 149, 220-2; high rent of enclosed land, 150; land could not be 
cultivated by factors, 157; oatmeal said to be better food than wheat flour, 
160;] the common people of, why neither so strong nor so handsome as the 
same class in England, ih.', [stone quarry affords no rent in some parts, 163; 
bark the only part of wood sent to market in parts of the Highlands, 163; 
rent for quarries of London paving stones, ih.', many coal mines yield no 
rent, 165; sixth part a common rent of fertile lead mines, 168; conversion 
prices, 181; wages higher than in France, 187; price of corn in England and 
Scotland compared, 189;] cause of the frequent emigrations from, 189; [pro- 
portion of gold and silver in the coinage, 212-3; price of cattle affected by 
the union, 220-2;] progress of agriculture there before the union with Eng- 
land, 222; present obstructions to better husbandry, ih.', [dairy farming, 
227; calves formerly killed young, 232;] the price of wool reduced by the 
union, 234, 616; operation of the several banking companies established 
there, 281 [-301;] amount of the circulating money there before the union, 
281; amount of the present circulating cash, 282; course of dealings in the 
Scots bank, ib.', [cash accounts do not exclude bill discounting, 284; twenty- 
shilling notes lowest paper money current, ih.'^ difficulties occasioned by 
these banks issuing too much paper, 286-7; necessary caution for some time 
observed by the banks in giving credit to their customers, with the good 
effects of it, 289; [limit of paper money reached twenty-five years ago, 292;] 
the scheme of drawing and redrawing adopted by traders, 293; its pernicious 
tendency explained, 294; history of the Ayr bank, 297; Mr. Law*s scheme to 
improve the country, 301; [issue of small notes extends the paper circulation 
to retail trade, 306; and banishes gold and silver, 307;] the prices of goods in, 
not altered by paper currency, 308-9; effect of the optional clauses in their 



958 


INDEX 


notes, 309; [union caused nobility to cease residing in Edinburgh, 320; wool 
manufactured in Yorkshire, 346; trade with London, 349; one fifth or one 
third of the land entailed, 363; steel bow tenants, 367; long leases, 369; no 
leasehold carries a parliamentary vote, ih.\ hospitality in the Highlands, 
386; small rent for Highland farms, ihr, territorial jurisdictions in the High- 
lands, 387; prohibition of ejsport of gold and silver, 400; manufacturing 
wine in, 425; mountains destined for breeding grounds, 427 ] 

[Herring fishery, 485-8, and Appendix; salt duty, 485; herrings an im- 
portant part of food of common people, 487; English bounty on hemp im- 
ported from, 609-10; judges’ salary from interest of money, 680; parish 
schools, 737;] cause of the speedy establishment of the reformation there, 
758; the disorders attending popular elections of the clergy there, occasion 
the right of patronage to be established, 761; [respectable clergy, 762; emi- 
nent men of letters professors, 763-4;] amount of the whole revenue of the 
clergy, 765; [excellent character of church, foris-familiated children, 
81 1 ; shoes not a necessary of life to women in, 822; linen subject to duty on 
importation into England, 866; little malt liquor consumed, 891; more 
smuggling than in England, ib.; redundant paper money the consequence of 
enterprising spirit, 894; has banished gold and silver in, ib.; less spirit of 
party than in England, 898.] 

[Scythia, barbarous because inland, 20; overran Western Empire, 361; if united 
could conquer Europe and Asia, 655; militia of Mithridates, 664-5; military 
organisation preserved after fall of Western Empire, 666; administration of 
justice a source of revenue, 675; not much beyond shepherd stage at fall of 
Western Empire, 676.] 

[Sea-coast, earlier civilisation of, 18.] 

Sea service and military service by land, compared, 109. 

[Secrets in trade, 60.] 

Sects in religion, the more numerous, the better for society, 745; why they gener- 
ally profess the austere system of morality, 746. 

[Seignorage, none in England, 42, 286, 445; but some delay equivalent to one, 
44; would increase the superiority of coin above bullion, 45; 8 per cent, in 
France, 45, 445, 518; diminishes or removes the profit on melting new coin, 
518-22.] 

[Seius, 219.] 

Self-love the governing principle in the intercourse of human society, 14. 

[Senegal, 622, 697, 83 2. J 

Servants, menial, distinguished from hired workmen, 314; the various orders of 
men, who rank in the former class, in reference to their labours, 315; their 
labour unproductive, 639; [see Menservants and Maidservants.] 

[Servius Tullius, 24, 26.] 

[Sestertius, silver coin estimated in copper, 39.] 

Settlements of the poor, brief review of the English laws relating to, i35[-4i;] the 
removals of the poor, a violation of natural liberty, 141; the law of, ought to 
be repealed, 437. 

(Seymour, 330.] 

Sheep, frequently killed in Spain, for the sake of the fleece and the tallow, 229; 
severe laws against the exportation of them and their wool, 612-3. 

[Sheffield produces necessary articles, 115; master cutlers only allowed one ap- 
prentice, 119; reduction in price of goods, 243* manufactures grown up 
naturally, 383 ] 

[Shells, currency on coast of India, 23.] 

Shepherds, war how supported by a nation of, 653-4; [much leisure among, 659;] 
inequality of fortune among, the source of great authority, 672; birth and 
family highly honoured in nations of shepherds, 673; inequality of fortune 
first began to take place in the age of shepherds, 674; and introduced civil 
government, tb,; [every man exerts his capacity among, 735 ] 

Shetland, [wages and price of stockings, 117;] how rents are estimated and i)aid 
there, 145; [herring fishery, 4S6.] 



INDEX 


959 


[Shilling, 26.] 

[Shopkeepers, prejudice against, unfounded, 342; nation of, 579; navigation act 
inspired by, 580; proposed tax on, 804.] 

^Shropshire, 168,] 

Siam, Gulf of, 21.] 

Siberia barbarous because inland, 20; caravans through, 204.) 

Sicily, price of wheat in ancient, 218; silk manufactures imported, 345; Venice 
originally imported silk from, 381-2; colonised by Dorians, 523; greatness of 
Greek colonies in, 533.] 

[Silesia, lawns of, 440; land-tax, 786.] 

Silk, [weavers in London allowed only two apprentices, 119;] manufacture, how 
transferred from Lucca to Venice, 381 ; [ejqpensive in Greece and Rome, 648; 
English manufacturers could undersell French and Italians if duty free, 837.] 
Silver, [varies greatly from century to century but not from year to year, 36; 
used for purchases of moderate value, 38;] the first standard coinage of the 
northern subverters of the Roman empire, 39; its proportional value to gold 
regulated by law, 40; is the measure of the value of gold, ih.; mint price of 
silver in England, 42; inquiry into the difference between the mint and mar- 
ket prices of bullion, 16.; how to preserve the silver coin from being melted 
down for profit, 44; the mines of, in Europe, why generally abandoned, 168; 
evidences of the small profit they 3deld to proprietors in Peru, ih.\ [seldom 
found virgin like gold, and consequences thereof, 171;] qualities for which 
this metal is valued, ib.; the most abundant mines of, would add little to the 
wealth of the world, 173; but the increase in the quantity of, would depre- 
ciate its own value, 176; circumstances that might counteract this effect, 
ib.; historical view of the variations in the value of, during the four last 
centuries, 176; remarks on its rise in value compared with corn, 180-1; cir- 
cumstances that have misled writers in reviewing the value of silver, 181; 
corn the best standard for judging of the real value of silver, 187; the price 
of, how affected by the increase of quantity, 188; the value of, sunk by the 
discovery of the American mines, 19 1; when the reduction of its value from 
this cause appears to have been completed, 192; tax paid from the Peruvian 
mines to the king of Spain, 201 ; the value of silver kept up by an extension 
of the market, 202; is the most profitable commodity that can be sent to 
China, 206; the value of, how proportioned to that of gold, before and after 
the discovery of the American mines, 21 1; the quantity commonly in the 
market in proportion to that of gold, probably greater than their relative 
values indicate, 212; [a proper subject of taxation, 214;] the value of, prob- 
ably rising, and why, ibr, the opinion of a depreciation of its value, not well 
founded, 240. 

The real value of, degraded by the bounty on the exportation of corn, 476; 
[tax on, in America, 529; has not varied since the imposition of the English 
land-tax, 781; not necessary to the Americans, 892-3; see Gold and Silver.] 
Sinking fund in the British finances, explained, 868; is inadequate to the dis- 
charge of former debts, and almost wholly applied to other purposes, 872-3; 
motives to the misapplication of it, 873. 

Slaves, the labour of, dearer to the masters than that of free men, 80; under 
feudal lords, circumstances of their situation, 364; countries where this 
order of men still remains, 365; why the service of slaves is preferred to that 
of free men, ib.\ their labour why unprofitable, 366; causes of the abolishing 
of slavery throughout the greater part of Europe, 366-7, 

[Cultivation under the Romans by, 524;] receive more protection from the 
magistrate in an arbitrary government, than in one that is free, 553; why 
employed in manufactures by the ancient Grecians, 647-8; why no im- 
provements are to be expected from them, 648; [domestic pedagogues usual- 
ly slaves in Greece and Rome, 730.] 

[Smith, Charles, Tracts on the Corn TradCf quoted, 199, 428, 473, 475.] 

[Smith, John, Memoirs of Wool, quoted, 2^0, 616.J 

Smuggling, a tempting, but generally a ruinous emplojnnent, in; [of lea, 203; 



96o index 

moderate tax does not encourage, 520; encouraged by Hgh duties, [779,] 
832; remedies against, 835; [excise laws obstruct more than those of the 
customs, 837;] the crime of, morally considered, 849; [more opportunities 
for, in thinly peopled countries, 891.] 

[Soap, dearer in consequence of taxes, 78; rendered necessary by the use of linen, 
825.] 

[Society, human, the first principles of, 14.] 

Soldiers, remarks on their motives for engaging in the military line, 109; com- 
parison between the land and sea service, ih.\ why no sensible inconvenience 
felt by the disbanding of great numbers after a war is over, 436; reason of 
their first serving for pay, 656; [possible proportion of, in civilised society, 
657;] how they became a distinct class of the people, 660; how distinguished 
from the militia, ih.\ alteration in their exercise produced by the invention 
of fire-arms, 660-1. 

Solomon, Proverbs of, 724 ] 

Solon, laws of, 510, 730.] 

Solorzano, quoted, 201J 

Sou, 27.] 

Sound, the, transit duty, 846.] 

South Carolina, expenst of civil establishment, 540; duty on molasses, 888-9.] 

South Sea company, amazing capital once enjoyed by, 700, [703;] mercantile 
and stock-j'obbing proj'ects of, 703; assiento contract, ib.\ whale fishery, ib.; 
the capital of, turned into annuity stock, 704, 866, [868.] 

Sovereign and trader, inconsistent characters, 771. 

Sovereign, three duties only, necessary for him to attend to, for supporting a 
system of natural liberty, 651; how he is to protect the society from external 
violence, 653, 668; and the members of it, from the injustice and oppression 
of each other, 669; and to maintain public works and institutions, 681. 

Spain [mark on ingots of gold, 25; tax of one fifth on Peruvian mines, 169, 201; 
avidity for gold in St. Domingo, 174; declension not so great as is commonly 
imagined, 202; saying of Charles V. that everything was wanting, ib.; colo- 
nies, 203; sheep killed for fleece and tallow, 229;] one of the poorest countries 
in Europe, notwithstanding its rich mines, 238-9; [wool, 244, 345, 382, 383, 
616; ambassador gave Queen Elizabeth stockings, 245;] its commerce has 
produced no considerable manufactures for distant sale, and the greater 
part of the countiy remains uncultivated, 395; Spanish mode of estimating 
their American discoveries, 399; [wealth according to the Spaniards con- 
sisted in gold and silver, ib.; prohibition of English woollens in Flanders, 
434; sober, though wine is cheap, 459.] 

The value of gold and silver there, depreciated by laying a tax on the 
exportation of them, 478; agriculture and manufactures there, discouraged 
by the redundancy of gold and silver, 479; natural consequences that would 
result from taking away this tax, ib.; [attempt to deprive Britain of Portu- 
gal trade, 515; representations of Columbus to the court, 527;] the real and 
pretended motives of the court of Castile for taking possession of the coun- 
tries discovered by Columbus, 528; the tax on gold and silver, how reduced, 
529; gold, the object of all the enterprises to the new world, 529[-3i; Crown 
derived some revenue from colonies, 534;] the colonies of, less populous 
than those of any other European nation, ib.; asserted an exclusive claim to 
all America, until the miscarriage of their invincible armada, 536; policy of 
the trade with the colonies, 543; the American establishments of, effected by 
private adventurers, who received little beyond permission from the govern- 
ment, 556; [Flota drained Germany of many commodities, 572;] lost its 
manufactures by acquiring rich and fertile colonies, 575; [veterans equalled 
by the American militia, 663; united with France by the British acquisition 
of Gibraltar and Minorca, 698-9; transaction with South Sea Company, 
703-4; Greek not taught in universities, 722;] the Alcavala tax there ex- 
plained, 850; the ruin of the Spanish manufactures attributed to it, ib.; 
[large national debt, 881; see Spain and Portugal] 



INDEX 


9O1 


[Spain and Portugal, supposed to have gone backwards, 202; beggarly and mis- 
governed countries though the value of gold and silver is low, 238-9; in- 
effectual attempts to restrict exportation of gold and silver, 400, 404, 508; 
quantity of gold and silver annually imported, 412.] 

[Gold and silver naturally a little cheaper there than elsewhere, 478; ex- 
ports of gold and silver nearly equal to the imports thereof, ih.) agriculture 
discouraged by the cheapness of gold and silver, 479; would gain by aban- 
doning the restrictions, 479-80; history of the American colonies, 534-6; 
colonies have more good land than the British, 538; right of majorazao in 
the colonies hinders improvement, 539; some revenue drawn from the 
colonies, 541, 560; colonial commerce confined to one port and to licensed 
ships, 543; American fish trade, 545; absolute government in colonies, 552; 
benefited by colonisation of America, 557; colonial monopoly has not 
maintained manufactures, 575; and its bad effects have nearly overbalanced 
the good effects of the trade, ih.) capital not augmented by the exorbitant 
profits of Cadi^ and Lisbon, 578; the colonies give greater encouragement 
to the industry of other countries, 591; only the profits of the linen trade 
with America spent in, ih.] 

[Sparta, iron money at, 24.] 

Speculation, a distinct employment in improved society, 10; speculative mer- 
chants described, 114. 

[Spices, Dutch are said to burn, in plentiful years, 158, 491, 600; imported into 
Great Britain, 834.] 

[Spirits, licence to retail, 804; wages not affected by taxes on, 823; taxes on, 
paid by consumers, 828; policy of Great Britain to discourage consumption 
of, 842.] 

[Spitalfields, silk manufacture, 381-2.] 

Stage, public performers on, paid for the contempt attending their profession, 
107; the political use of dramatic representations, 748. 

[Stallage, 374.] 

[Stamp Act, the American, 84, 571.] 

Stamp duties, [on proceedings in law courts might maintain the judges, 679-80; 
loans taxed by, 810;] in England and Holland, remarks on, 812; [on wills in 
Holland, ihr, in France, 813, 814; have become almost universal in Europe 
in the course of a century, 813; often taxes on consumption, 815; one of 
three principal branches of British taxes, 887- extension to the colonies 
887.] 

[Stamps on linen and woollen cloth, 25, 122 ] 

[Standard money, 39, 40.] 

[Statesman or politician, who attempts to direct the employment of private 
capital, 423; insidious and crafty animal, 435; in barbarous societies every 
man a, 735.J 

Stecl-bow tenants in Scotland, what, 367, 

[Stewart, House of, 751.] 

Stock, [early state preceding accumulation of, 47;] the profits raised on, in manu- 
factures, explained, 48; in trade, an increase of, raises wages, and diminishes 
profit, 87; [profits of, 87-143;] must be larger in a great town than in a 
country village, 89; natural consequences of a deficiency of stock in new 
colonies, 92; the profits on, little affected by the easiness or difficulty of 
learning a trade, 103; but by the risk, or disagreeablencss of the business, 
iio-i; [circulation of, obstructed, 135;] stock employed for profit, sets into 
motion the greater part of useful labour, 249; no accumulation of, necessary 
in the rude state of society, 2^9; the accumulation of, necessary to the 
division of labour, ih.) stock distinguished into two parts, 260-1; the general 
stock of a countty or society, explained, 263; houses, ih.; improved land, 
26s; personal abilities, ib.; money and provisions, 266; raw materials and 
manufactured goods, ib.; stock of individuals, how employed, 268; is fre- 
quently buried or concealed, in arbitrary countries, ib.; the profits on, de^ 



962 INDEX 

crease, in proportion as the quantity increases, 318; on what principles 
Stock is lent and borrowed at interest, 333. 

' That of every society divided among different employments, in the propor- 
tion most agreeable to the public interest, by the private views of indivi- 
duals, 594; the natural distribution of, deranged by monopolizing systems, 
596; every derangement of, injurious to the society, 597; mercantile, is 
barren and unproductive, according to the French agricultural system of 
political oeconomy, 631; how far the revenue from, is an object of taxation, 
798; [easily removed, 800;] a tax on, intended under the land tax, 801. 
Stockings, why cheaply manufactured in Scotland, 117; when first introduced 
into England, 245. 

[Stomach, desire of food bounded by narrow capacity of the, 164.] 

Stone quarries, their value depends on situation, 163, 175. 

Stones, precious, of no use but for ornament, and how the price of, is regulated, 
172; the most abundant mines of, would add little to the wealth of the 
world, 173. 

[Stowe, 331.] 

[Suabia, house of, 378.] 

Subordination, how introduced into society, 670; personal qualifications, 671; 
age and fortune, il.; birth, 672; birth and fortune two great sources of 
personal distinction, 673. 

Subsidy, old, in the English customs, the drawbacks upon, 466-7; origin and 
import of the term, 830. 

[Succession, laws of, 361.] 

[Successions, tax on, in Holland, 810.] 

Sugar, [currency in some West India Colonies, 23;] a very profitable article of 
cultivation, 156, [157], 366. 

Drawbacks on the exportation of, from England, 467; might be cultivated 
by the drill plough, instead of all hand labour by slaves, 553; [tax on, does 
not affect wages, 823; yields considerable customs revenue, 834; duty on, 
falls chiefly on middle and upper ranks, 837; planters say the duty falls on 
the producer, 844;] a proper subject for taxation, as an article sold at a 
monopoly price, ibr, [nowhere a necessary of life, 889.] 

Sumptuary laws superfluous restraints on the common people, 329; [resemblance 
of taxes on luxuries to, 827.] 

Surinam, present state of the Dutch colony there, 537. 

Surmullet, high price paid for, 219.J 
Sussex, restrictions on transport of wool, 614.] 

Sweden, improved since the discovery of .^erica, 202; tea smuggled from, 205; 
established exclusive company for East Indian trade, 417; settlements in 
New, World, 536; pitch and tar company of, 547; without an exclusive 
company would never have sent a ship to East Indies, 596; and would have 
suffered no loss, 597; exempted from Eastland Company's exclusive privi- 
lege, 693; Reformation in, 758; eminent men of letters professors, 763-4.) 
[Swift, quoted, 832.] 

Switzerland [farmers not inferior to the British, 371; cities became independent, 
378; sometimes may be necessary to restrain export of corn, 507; militia 
regimented, 660; militia defeated Austrian and Burgundian militia, 666; 
whole people exercised in use of arms, 739;] establishment of the reforma- 
tion in Berne and Zurich, 758; [many cities capitals of little republics, 760; 
respectable clergy, 762; eminent men of letters professors in Protestant 
cantons, 763;] the clergy there zealous and industrious, 765-6; [both reli- 
gions established in some cantons, j&.;] taxes how paid there, 802, 81 r. 
[S3nracuse a great colony, 533.] 

[Syria, 664,] 

Taille, in France, the nature of that tax, and its operation, explained, 370, 805; 
[real or predial, 787; real and personal, 805; on the industry of workmen and 



INDEX 963 

day labourers a tax on wages, 817; not farmed, 855; should be abolished and 
replaced by an increase of vingtUmeSj ih,] 

[Tailors, the lowest order of artificers, wages in London, 104; wages in London 
regulated by statute, 141-2.] 

Talents, natural, not so various in different men as is supposed, 15, 

Tallage, 370.] 

Tallies, exchequer, 864.] 

Tarentum a great colony, 533.] 

Tartar Khan, history written by a, 391.] 

Tartars, [barbarous because inland, 20; ignorant, 203; caravans passing through 
204; taxes on travellera, 373; ancient families common among, 391; shep- 
herds, with no regulations of law as to transmission of property, ih.\ wealth 
considered to consist in cattle, 399; chiefs have treasures, 414.] 

Their manner of conducting war, 653-4; their invasions dreadful, 655; 
[militia serves under ordinary chieftains, 662; obedience in the field superior 
to the Highlanders, ib.'; most formidable enemies to the Romans, 664-5; 
conquests of civilised Asiatic countries, 667, 741; chiefs can only use surplus 
revenue in maintaining more men, 671; Khans despotic, 672; justice a 
source of revenue after fall of Western empire, 674-5; hungry, 741; chiefs 
revenue profit, 769.] 

Tavernier, his account of the diamond mines of Golconda and Visiapour, 172. 
Taxes, [derivative revenue, 53; on gold and silver very proper, 214;] the origin of, 
under the feudal government, 373-4. 

[Moderation of, a cause of the prosperity of British American colonies, 
540; ruinous, of private luxury and extravagance, 541; American, generally 
insufficient to defray the cost of the colonies, 560; on exportation of wool 
would cause little inconvenience, 618; imposed by means of a monopoly, 
712; general discussion of, 777-852;] the sources from whence they must 
arise, 777; unequal taxes, ih.\ ought to be clear and certain, ih.\ ought to be 
levied at the times most convenient for payment, 778; ought to take as 
little as possible out of the pockets of the people, more than is brought into 
the public treasury, ih.\ how they may be made more burdensome to the 
people than beneficial to the sovereign, 779; the land-tax of Great Britain, 
780; land-tax at Venice, 782; improvements suggested for a land-tax, ib.^ 
mode of assessing the land-tax in Prussia, 787; tythes a very unequal tax, 
and a discouragement to improvement, 789; operation of tax on house rent, 
payable by the tenant, 792; a proportionable tax on houses, the best source 
of revenue, 794; how far the revenue from stock is a proper object of taxa- 
tion, 798; whether interest of money is proper for taxation, 799; how taxes 
are paid at Hamburgh, 801; in Switzerland, 802; taxes upon particular em- 
ployments, 803; poll taxes, 808; taxes, badges of liberty, ib.'; taxes upon the 
transfer of property, 810; stamp duties, 812; on whom the several kinds of 
taxes principally fall, 813; taxes upon the wages of labour, 815; capitations, 
819; taxes upon consumable commodities, 821; upon necessaries, 822; upon 
luxuries, 823; principal necessaries taxed, 824; absurdities in taxation, 
825-6; different parts of Europe very highly taxed, 826; two different 
methods of taxing consumable commodities, 827; Sir Matthew Deckeris 
scheme of taxation considered, 828; excise and customs, 829; taxation some- 
times not an instrument of revenue, but of monopoly, 833; improvements 
of the customs suggested, 834; taxes paid in the price of a commodity little 
adverted to, 846-7; on luxuries, the good and bad properties of, ib.; bad 
effects of farming them out, 853; how the finances of France might be re- 
formed, 855; French and English S3rstems of taxation compared, 856; new 
taxes always generate discontent, 873; how far the British system of taxa- 
tion might be applicable to all the different provinces of the empire, 886; 
such a plan might speedily discharge the national debt, 890, 

Tea, great importation and consumption of that drug in Britain, 205; [quantities 
smuggle^ 405; tax on, does not affect wages, 823; Dutch licences to drink, 



964 INDEX 

829; affords large part of customs revenue, 834; duty falls on middle and 
upper ranks, 837.] 

Teachers [earnings of, 132-4;] in universities, tendency of endowments to dimin- 
ish their application, 717; the jurisdictions to which they are subject, little 
calculated to quicken their diligence, 718;^ are frequently obliged to gain 
protection by servility, 719; defects in their establishments, 719; teachers 
among the ancient Greeks and Romans, superior to those of modern times, 
732; circumstances which draw good ones to, or drain them from, the uni- 
versities, 762-3; their employment naturally renders them eminent in 
letters, 764. 

[Tenths and jBfteenths, 370.] 

Tenures, feudal, general observations on, 318; described, 362. 

Terra Firma, 527.] 

Terray, Abb6, laised rate of interest in France, 90.] 

Teutonic order, land-tax of, in Silesia, 786.] 

Thales, school established in a colony, 533.] 

Theocritus, quoted, 10 1.] 

Theognis, 724.] 

Theology, monkish, the complexion of, 726. 

Thorn, William, quoted, 178.] 

Thrasymenus, battle of, 664.] 

Thucydides, quoted, 655, 656.] 

Timaeus, quoted, 24.] 

Timber, rent for land producing, 163.] 

Tin, average rent of the mines of, in Cornwall, 168; yield a greater profit to the 
proprietors than the silver mines of Peru, 169; regulations imder which tin- 
mines are worked, 170. 

Tobacco, [currency in Virginia, 23;] the culture of, why restrained in Europe, 
157; not so profitable an article of cultivation in the West Indies as sugar, 
ih.\ the amount and course of the British trade with, explained, 353; [pro- 
fits of, can afford slave cultivation, 366; trade in, 458-9.] 

The whole duty upon, drawn back on exportation, 467; consequences of 
the exclusive trade Britain enjoys with Maryland and Virginia in this 
article, 561; [tax on, does not raise wages, 823; contributes large amount to 
customs revenue, 834; Walpole's scheme for lev^ng the tax on, 837; mono- 
poly in France, 854-5; nowhere a necessary of life, but a proper subject of 
taxation, 889.] 

[Tobago, a new field for speculation, 895.] 

Tolls, for passage over roads, bridges, and navigable canals, the equity of, shewn, 
683; upon carriages of luxury, ought to be higher than upon carriages of 
utility, il).\ the management of turnpikes often an object of just complaint, 
684; why government ought not to have the management of turnpikes, 
685, 845; [on carriages an unequal general tax, 686; lay expense of maintain- 
ing roads on those who benefit, 767-8.] 

Tonnage and poundage, origin of those duties, 830. 

[Tonquin vessels at Batavia, 600.] 

Tontine in the French finances, what, with the derivation of the name, 870. 
[Toul treated as foreign by France, 852.] 

Toulouse, salary paid to a counsellor or judge in the parliament of, 678. 

Towns, the places where industry is most profitably exerted, i25[-8;] the spirit 
of combination prevalent among manufacturers, 126, 128; according to 
what circumstances the general character of the inhabitants, as to industry, 
is formed, 319; the reciprocal nature of the trade between them and the 
country, explained, 356; subsist on the surplus produce of the country, 357; 
how first formed, 358; are continual fairs, ihr, [rise and progress of, 373-83;] 
the original poverty and servile state of the inhabitants of, 373; their early 
exemptions and privileges, how obtained, 374; the inhabitants of, obtained 
liberty much earlier than the occupiers of land in the country, ih.\ origin of 
free burghs, 375; origin of coiporations, ib.] why allowed to form imlitia, 



INDEX 


96s 

378; how the increase and riches of commercial towns contributed to the 
improvement of the countries to which they belonged, 384[-96; favoured by 
Colbert at the expense of the country, 628.] 

^Tracts on the Com Trade quoted, 199, 428, 473, 475.] 

Trade, double interest deemed a reasonable mercantile profit in, 97; four general 
classes of, equally necessary to, and dependent on, each other, 341; whole- 
sale, three different sorts of, 348; the different returns of home and foreign 
trade, 34^; the nature and operation of the carrying trade examined, 351; 
the principles of foreign trade examined, 353; the trade between town and 
country explained, 356; original poverty and servile state of the inhabi- 
tants of towns, under feudal government, 373; exemptions and privileges 
granted to them, 374; extension of commerce by rude nations selling their 
own raw produce for the manufactures of more civilized countries, 380; its 
salutary effects on the government and manners of a country, 385; subvert- 
ed the feudal authority, 388; the independence of tradesmen and artisans, 
explained, 390; the capitals acquired by, very precarious, until some part 
has been realized by the cultivation and improvement of land, 395; over 
trading, the cause of complaints of the scarcity of money, 406; the importa- 
tion of gold and silver not the principal benefit derived from foreign trade, 
41 5 ; effect produced in trade and manufactures by the discovery of America, 
416; and by the discovery of a passage to the East Indies round the Cape 
of Good Hope, ih.] error of commercial writers in estimating national 
wealth by gold and silver, 418; inquiry into the cause and effect of restraints 
upon trade, 418; individuals, by pursuing their own interest, unknowingly 
promote that of the public, 423; legal regulations of trade, unsafe, 
retaliatory regulations between nations, 434; measures for la3dng trade 
open, ought to be carried into execution slowly, 438; policy of the restraints 
on trade between France and Britain considered, 441; no certain criterion 
to determine on which side the balance of trade between two countries 
turns, 442; most of the regulations of, founded on a mistaken doctrine of the 
balance of trade, 456; is generally founded on narrow principles of policy, 
460. 

Drawbacks of duties, 466; the dealer who employs his whole stock in one 
single branch of business, has an advantage of the same kind with the work- 
man who employs his whole labour on a single operation, 496; consequences 
of drawing it from a number of small channels into one great channel, 570-1 ; 
colony trade, and the monopoly of that trade, distinguished, 573; the inter- 
est of the consumer constantly sacrificed to that of the producer, 625; ad- 
vantages attending a perfect freedom of, to landed nations, according to the 
present agricultural system of political oeconomy in France, 635; origin of 
foreign trade, 635; consequences of high duties and prohibitions, in landed 
nations, 636, 637; how trade augments the revenue of a country, 641; 
[foreign, gives opportunity for improvement by example, 645;] nature of the 
trading intercourse between the inhabitants of towns and those of the 
country, 649-50. 

[Trade, Board of, 695.] 

Trades, cause and effect of the separation of, 5; origin of, 14, 15. 

[Traites in France, divide the country into three parts, 852; are farmed, 855.] 
[Transfer of property, taxes on, 810.] 

Transit duties explained, 845. 

Travelling for education, summary view of the effects of, 728. 

Treasures, [of princes formerly a resource in war, 410; no longer accumulated 
except by king of Prussia, i 5 .;] why formerly accumulated by princes, 414. 
Treasure trove, the term explained, 268; why an important branch of revenqe 
under the ancient feudal governments, 860. 

Treaties of commerce, 511-16.] 

Trebia, battle of, 664.] 

Triclinaria, high price of, 649.] ' 

Troll, Archbishop of Upsal, 758 ] 



INDEX 


966 

Troyes fair and weight, 26.] 

Truck, 13, 14.] 

Trust remunerated, 49.] 

Tumbrel and Pillory, statute of, 183 J 
’Turdi fed by the Romans, 224.] 

Turkey, treeisure buried and concealed, 268; conquest of Egypt, 380, 525; 
peace with Russia, 573.] 

Turkey company, [commerce of, required an ambassador at Constantinople, 
690;] short Idstorical view of, 693. 

[Turnips reduced in price, 78.] 

Turnpikes, [counties near London petitioned against, 147;] see Tolls. 

Tuscany, commerce and manufactures diminished, 396.] 

Tutors, private, lowest order of men of letters, 733.] 

Twelve Tables, 731,] 

Two and two in the arithmetic of the customs make one, 832.] 

Tyrrell, quoted, 675.] 

Tythes, [great hindrance to improvement, 367; none in British American colo- 
nies, 541;] why an unequal tax, 788; the levying of, a great discouragement 
to improvements, 789; [confined the cultivation of madder to Holland, i6.;] 
the fijnng a modus for, a relief to the farmer, 791. 

Ukraine, 203, 414.] 

;Ulloa, quoted, 148, 168, 169, 170, 186, 204, 534, 543.] 

Undertakers let the furniture of funerals, 265.] 

Unfunded debt, 863.] 

Universities, [seven years’ apprenticeship at, 120; proper name for any incor- 
poration, ih.] 

The emoluments of the teachers in, how far calculated to promote their 
diligence, 717; the professors at Oxford have mostly given up teaching, 718; 
those in France subject to incompetent jurisdictions, ih,] the privileges of 
graduates improperly obtained, 719; abuse of lectureships, 719-20; the 
discipline of, seldom calculated for the benefit of the students, 720; arc, in 
England, more corrupted than the public schools, 721; original foundation 
of, ih,\ how Latin became an essential article in academical education, 722; 
how the study of the Greek language was introduced, ib.] the three great 
branches of the Greek philosophy, 723; are now divided into five branches, 
725; the monkish course of education in, 726; have not been very ready to 
adopt improvements, 727; [improvements more easily introduced into the 
poorer, ih.]\ are not well calculated to prepare men for the world, ih,] how 
filled with good professors, or drained of them, 763; where the worst and 
best professors are generally to be met with, ih,] see Colleges and Teachers. 
Unproductive, see Productive.] 

Unterwald, taxes publicly assessed by the contributor, 802; moderate tax, 803.] 
Ustaritz, quoted, 850.] 

Usury prohibited, 860; see Interest.] 

Utopia, 437, 887.] 

Utrecht, 453.] 

Utrecht, Treaty of, 703, 874.] 

[Vacations, French fees of court, 678.] 

Value, the term defined, 28; [rules which determine the relative or exchangeable 
value of goods, 28-62,] 

[VaiTO quoted, 153, 224.] 

Vedius PoUio, his cruelty to his slaves checked by the Roman emperor Augustus, 
which could not have been done under the republican form of government, 

, 554 - 

[Veil, siege of, 656, 657.] 

[Velvet, prohibition of importation of, would be unnecessary if raw silk were 
free from duty, 837.] 



INDEX 967 

Venice, [history different from that of the other Italian republics, 378; shipping 
encouraged by the crusades, 380;] origin of the silk manufacture in that 
city, 381; [exchange with London, 445; bank of, 447.] 

Traded in East India goods before the sea track round the Cape of Good 
Hope was discovered, 525; [envied by the Portuguese, ib.] fleets kept within 
the Mediterranean, 536; draws profit from a bank, 770;] nature of the land- 
tax in that republic, 782, [783; enfeebled by public debt, 881.] 

Venison, the price of, in Britain, does not compensate the expence of a deer 
park, 224. 

yera Cruz, South Sea Company’s trade at, 704.] 

Verd, Cape de, islands, 525.] 

yerdun treated as foreign by France, 852.] 

Versailles, idle because the residence of a court, 319; an ornament to France, 
33I-] 

Vicesima haereditatum among the ancient Romans, the nature of, explained, 
810. 

[Vienna, small capital employed in, 320.] 

Villages, how first formed, 358. 

Villenage, probable cause of the wearing out of that tenure in Europe, 367; 
[freedom obtained by a villain who resided a year in a town, 379; depend- 
ence on proprietors, 386.] 

Vineyard, [high rent of some land peculiarly suitable for, 61;] the most profitable 
part of agriculture, both among the ancients and modems, 154; great ad- 
vantages derived from peculiarities of soil in, 155. 

[Vingti^me resembles English land-tax, 809; not farmed, 855; should be increased 
in place of the taille and capitation, i&J 
[Virginia, tobacco currency, 23; evidence of a merchant trading with, 15 1; to- 
bacco more profitable than corn, 157; with Maryland, the chief source of 
tobacco, ih.; stores and warehouses belong to residents in England, 347; 
trade with, 350-1, 457; tobacco trade, 353, 467, 560-1, 568.] 

[Expense of civil establishment, 540; progress unforeseen in 1660, 564; no 
necessity for gold and silver money, 894.] 

[Visiapour diamond mines, 172,] 

[Voltaire, quoted, 763.] 

[Vulgate, 722.] 

Wages of labour [allowance made for hardship and ingenuity, 31; money, ac- 
commodated to the average price of com, 36; value which workmen add to 
materials pays their wages, 48; of inspection and direction, 48-9; one of 
three original sources of revenue, 52, 777; sometimes confounded with 
profit and rent, 53; ordinary, average or natural rate of, 55; how affected by 
state of society, 63; general discussion of, 64-86;] how settled between 
masters and workmen, 66; the workmen generally obliged to comply with 
the terms of their employers, ib.\ the opposition of workmen outrageous, 
and seldom successful, 67; circumstances which operate to raise wages, 68; 
the extent of wages limited by the funds from which they arise, 68-9; why 
higher in North America, than in England, 69-70; are low in countries that 
are stationary, 71; not oppressively low in Great Britain, 74;^ a distinction 
made here between the wages in summer and in winter, 74; if sufl&cient in 
dear years, they must be ample in seasons of plenty, ib.\ different rates of, 
in different places, 74-5; liberal wages encourage industry and propagation, 
81; an advance of, necessarily raises the price of many commodities, 86; an 
average of, not easily ascertained, 87; [continually increasing since the time 
of Henry VIII., 89; higher in North American and West Indian colonies 
than in England, 92; do not sink with profits there, ib.\ very low in a coun- 
ty which could advance no further, 94;] the operation of high wages and 
high profits compared, 97; causes of the variations of, in different employ- 
ments, 99[-i43]; are generally higher in new, than in old trades, 114, 134; 



968 


INDEX 

legal regulations of, destroy industry and ingenuity, 14 1; [high, a cause of 
high prices, 146.] 

[Merchants complain of high, but say nothing about profits, 565; reduced 
by the colonial monopoly, 576;] natural effect of a direct tax upon, 81 $[-8, 
822; connexion of, with price of provisions, 815.] 

[Wales, stone quarries afford no rent, 163; old families common, 391; mountains 
destined to be breeding ground of Great Britain, 427.] 

Walpole, Sir Robert, his excise scheme defended, 837. 

Wants of mankind, how supplied through the operation of labour, 22; how ex- 
tended, in proportion to their supply, 163-4; the far greater part of them 
supplied from the produce of other men’s labour, 259. 

Wars, foreign, the funds for the maintenance of, in the present century, have 
little dependence on the quantity of gold and silver in a nation, 409-10; 
[expences abroad defrayed by export of commodities, 410-4.] 

How supported by a nation of hunters, 653; by a nation of shepherds, ih.\ 
by a nation of husbandmen, 655; men of military age, what proportion they 
bear to the whole society, 656; feudal wars, how supported, causes which 
in 'ie advanced state of society, rendered it impossible for those who took 
the field, to maintain themselves, 656-7; how the art of war became a dis- 
tinct profession, 658; distinction between the militia and regular forces, 
660; sdteration in the art of war produced by the invention of fire-arms, 
660-1, 668; importance of discipline, 662; Macedonian army, 663; Cartha- 
ginian army, 663-4; Roman army, 664; feudal armies, 666; a well-regulated 
standing army, the only defence of a civilized country, and the only means 
for speedily civilizing a barbarous county, 667; the want of parsimony 
during peace, imposes on states the necessity of, contracting debts to carry 
on war, 861, 872; why war is agreeable to those who live secure from the 
immediate calamities of it, 872; advantages of raising the supplies for, with- 
in the year, 878; [popularity of, and how it might be removed, ih] 
[Warwick, the Earl of, his hospitality, 385-6.] 

Watch movements, great reduction in the prices of, owing to mechanical im- 
provements, 243. 

[Waterworks a business suitable for a joint-stock company, 713, 714, 715.] 
Wealth, [real, the annual produce, lx, 238, 241, 321, 329-30, 419; national, repre- 
sented by one system of poUtical ceconomy as consisting in the abimdance 
of gold and silver, 237-8; land the most important and durable part of, 241; 
real, 247, 248; that of England much increased since 1660, 327;] and money, 
synonymous terms, in popular language, 398, 418J Spanish and Tartarian 
estimate of, compared, 398; [wealth of a neighbouring nation advantageous 
in trade, 461; accumulated produce, 659; makes a nation obnoxious to 
attack, ib.][ the great authority conferred by the possession of, 671. 
Weavers, the profits of, why necessarily greater than those of spinners, 51. 
[Weigh and pay, maxim of the port of London, 569.] 

[Western Islands, wages in, 76.] 

West Indies, [sugar currency, 23; planters farm their own estates, 53; wages 
higher than in England, 92; British acquisitions in, raised profits, 93; sugar 
colonies resemble esteemed vineyards, r56; interest fallen since the discov- 
ery of, 337; carmng trade between, and Europe, 354; would have pro- 
gressed less rapidly if no capital but their own had been employed in the 
export trade, 360; slavery harsher than in mediaeval Europe, 364; high 
profits of sugar and consequent greater number of slaves in sugar colonies, 
366; importation of gold and silver from the Spanish, 405; expense of last 
war l^gely laid out in, 410.] 

[British monopoly in sugar of, 464; Madeira wine imported directly, 469; 
interest which caused settlements in, 523; no necessity for settlements, 525; 
discovered by Columbus, 526; how tbey obtained this name, 527; the origi- 
nal native productions of, ih.*, the thirst of gold the object of all the Spanish 
enterprises there, 529; and of those of every other European nation, 533;; 
[plenty of good land, 533, 538;] the remoteness of, greatly in favour of the 



INDEX 969 

European colonies there, 534; [Dutch originally under an exclusive com- 
pany, 537; St. Domingo the most important of the sugar colonies, 538; 
price of European goods enormous in Spanish, 542; some most important 
productions non-enumerated, 544; freedom of trade with British American 
colonies, 547;] the sugar colonies of France better governed than those of 
Britain, 552-3; [effects of colonial monopoly, 567; returns of trade with, 
more irregular and uncertain than with any part of Europe, 568; expense of 
preventing smuggling, 580; proposal for obtaining war contributions from, 
585; natives not benefited by the European discovery of, 590; gum senega 
treated like an enumerated commodity from, 622; colonial system sacrifices 
consumer to producer, 625; slave trade a loss to the African Company, 701; 
French and Portuguese companies ruined by slave trade, 703; South Sea 
Company's trade to the Spanish, some productions of, yield large por- 
tion of British customs revenue, 834; more able to pay land-tax than Great 
Britain, 887.] 

[Westminster lanitax, 774, 801.] 

[Westminster Hall, Rufus’ dining-room, 385.] 

[Westmorland, price of coal in, 168.] 

Wheat, see Corn. 

[Whitehall, palace of, land-tax, 774.] 

[William Rufus dined in Westminster Hall, 385.] 

[William III. unable to refuse anything to the country gentlemen, 197.] 
[Wilton, ornament to England, 331.] 

Window tax in Britain, how rated, 797; tends to reduce house-rent, 798. 
Windsor market, chronological table of the prices of corn at, 256-8. 

Wine, the cheapness of, would be a cause of sobriety, 459; the carrying trade in, 
encouraged by English statutes, 468; [cellar, a public, a source of revenue to 
Hamburg, 769; licences to sell, 804; tax on, paid by consumers, 828; tonnage 
on, 830; forei^ article commonly used in Great Britain, 834; Walpole’s 
scheme for levying the tax on, 837; duty on, falls on middle and upper 
ranks, ib.] 

[Witchcraft, fear of, compared to that of engrossing and forestalling, 500.] 
[Wolverhampton, manufactures of, not within the statute of apprenticeship, 
1 21; manufactures grown up naturally, 383.] 

[Women’s education contains nothing fantastical, 734.] 

Wood, the price of, rises in proportion as a country is cultivated, 165; the growth 
of young trees prevented by cattle, ^'6.; when the planting of trees becomes a 
profitable employment, 166. 

[Woodcocks could not be much increased, 218.] 

Wool, the produce of rude countries, commonly carried to a distant market, 229; 
the price of, in England, has fallen considerably since the time of Edward 
IIL, 230; causes of this diminution in price, ib.\ the price of, considerably 
reduced in Scotland, by the union with England, 234. 

Severity of the laws against the exportation of, 612-3; restraints upon the 
inland commerce of, 614; restraints upon the coasting trade of, 615; pleas on 
which these restraints are founded, 615-6; the price of wool depressed by 
these regulations, 616; the exportation of, ought to be allowed, subject to a 
duty, 618. 

Woollen cloth, the present prices of, compared with those at the close of the 
fifteenth century, 244; three mechanical improvements introduced in the 
manufacture of, 246; [in ancient Rome much higher in price than now, 649,] 

[Yeomanry, superior position of the English, 368, 371.] 

[Yorkshire, woollen manufacture, 84; cloth fallen in price, 244, 245; small paper 
currencies, 307, 310; Scotch wool manufactured there, 346.] 

[Young men’s generosity to their teachers, 721, 731.] 

[Yucatan, 203.] 

[Zama, battle of, 664.] 



970 INDEX 

[Zealand, French wine smuggled from, 442; expense of protecting from the sea, 

857.] 

Zemindaries, 791.] 

Zeno of Citta, the Portico assigned to, 731.] 

Zeno of Elea, travelled from place to place, 730.] 

Zurich, the reformation in, 758; tax on revenue assessed by the contributor, 
802; moderate tax, 803.] 

[Zwinglius, 760.] 



INDEX II 


AUTHORITIES 

This index contains the names of aidhorities referred to in the editor^ s notes as well 
as in the author^ s notes and the text, 

Abulgasi, Histoire ginMogique des Tatars^ traduite du manuscript Tartar e D^Abid- 
gasi Bayadur-chan, etc.^ par D., Leyden, 1726, 391. 

Acts of the Parliaments of Scotland, 1822, 183, 761. 

America, The Present State of Great Britain and North America with regard to 
Agriculture, Population, Trade and Manufactures, 1767, 70. 

Anderson, Adam, Historical and Chronological Deduction of the Origin of Cown 
merce, 1764, 246, 281, 306, 431, 442, 454, 547, 548, 552, 609, 616, 622, 690, 
693, 694, 700, 701, 702, 703, 704, 705, 706, 707, 714, 715, 868, 869, 873, 875. 

Anderson, James, Selectus diplomatum et numismatum Scotiae thesaurus, ed. 
Thos. Ruddiman, 1739, 183, 213, 281, 282. 

Arbuthnot, Dr. John, Tables of Ancient Coins, Weights and Measures, 2nd ed., 
1754, i33» 649, 321. 

Aristotle, Politics, 25, 365, 729. 

Arts et MStiers, Description des,faites ou approuv 6 es par Messieurs de VAcadSmie 
Royale des Sciences, 1761-88, 126. 

Ayr Bank, see Douglas, Heron and Co. 

Bacon, Matthew, New Abridgement of the Law, 1768, 120, 368. 

Baretti, Joseph, Journey from London to Genoa, through England, Portugal, Spain 
and France, 1770, 513. 

Bazinghen, M. Abot de, Traiti des Monnoies et de la jurisdiction de la Cour des 
Monnoies en forme de dictionnaire, 1764, 518. 

Beaumont, Moreau de, M ^moires concernant les Impositions et Droits en Europe, 
1768, 770, 772, 782, 786, 787, 797, 801, 802, 806, 810, 811, 812, 817, 82^1, 
827, 850. 

Bell, John, of Antermony, Travels from St. Petersburg in Russia to Diverse Parts 
of Asia, Glasgow, 1763, 644. 

Bergeron, N., Voyages f aits principalement en Asie dans les xU., xiii., xiv., et xv. 
siicles, 173s, 399. 

Berkeley, Dr. George, Bishop of Cloyne, Querist, 1752, 78, 80. 

Bernier, Francois, Voyages, 1710, 688. 

Bible, 25, 789. 

Birch, Thos., D.D., The Life of Henry, Prince of Wales, 1760, 131. 

Blackstone, William, Commentaries on the Laws of England, 1765-9, 35, 233, 368. 

Bolts, William, Consider atio'ns on India Af airs, particularly respecting the present 
stale of Bengal and its Dependencies, 1772, 604. 

Borlase, William, Natural History of Cornwall, 1758, 168, 169, 170. 

Bouchaud, Mathieu Antoine, De Vimpdt du Vingtieme sur les successions et dc 
Vimpdt sur les marchandises chez les Romains; recherckes historiques, etc.y 
1772, 8to. 

Brady, Robert, Historical Treatise of Cities and Burghs or Boroughs, 1711, 374. 

British Merchant, 1721, see King, Charles, 

Buffon, Histoire Naturelle, 1755, 226, 527. 

971 



972 INDEX II 

Burman, De vectigalibus populi RomafS dissertatio (in Utriusque thesauri anti- 
quitatum Romanarum graecarumque nom supplemental congesta ab J. Po- 
leno, 1737), 810. 

Bum, Richard, Ecclesiastical Law, 1763, 130. 

Justice of the Peace, 1764, 122, 136, 139. 

History of the Poor-laws, 1764, 77, 139, 140, 141. 

Byron, Hon. John, Narrative of the Hon. John Byron, containing an Account of 
the Great Distresses suffered by himself and his companions on the Coast of 
Patagonia from 1740 to 1746, 1768, 186. 

Cantillon, Richard, Essai sur la Nature du Commerce en ginM, 1755, 23, 30 
68, 80, 99, 102, 105, 106, 211, 336, 358. 

Cato, De re rustica, 429. 

Chambers, E., Cyclopaedia, 1738, 5. 

Charlevoix, F. X. de, Histoire de VIsle Espagnole ou de S. Domingue, 1730, 526, 

527- 

Histoire et description g&ntrale de la nouvelle France, avec le journal historique 

d^un voyage dans VAmirique Septentrionnale, 17^, 538. 

Child, Sir Josiah, New Discourse of Trade, 401, 692, 693, 695. 

Churchill, Awnsham and John, Voyages and Travels, 1704, 535. 

Cicero, Ad Atticum, 94. 

De Divinatione, 827. 

De Officiis, 150. 

In Verrem, 218. 

Columella, De re rustica, 153, 154, 224, 365. 

Commons, Journals of the House of, 297, 711. 

Considerations on the Trade and Finances of this Kingdom and on the measures of 
administralion with respect to those great national objects since the conclusion 
of the peace (attributed to Thos. Whately), 1766, 875. 

Daniel, Gabriel, Histoire de France, 1755, 377, 378, 756. 

Davenant, Dr. Charles, Works, 1771, 70, 77, 196, 842. 

Decker, Sir Matthew, Essay on the Causes of the Decline of the Foreign Trade, 
consequently of the Value of the Lands of Britain, and on the means to restore 
both, 2nd ed., 1750, 480, 563, 825, 828. 

De Lange, see Bell. 

Denisart, J.-B., Collection de decisions nouvelles et de notions relatives d la juris- 
prudence actuelle, 1771, 90. 

Desaguliers, J. T., Course of Experimental Philosophy, 1744, 10. 

Dion Cassius, History, 810. 

Dion3rsius of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities, 729, 732. 

Dobbs, Arthur, An Account of the Countries Adjoining to Ihidson^s Bay . , , 
with an Abstract of Captain Middleton^ s Journal, and Observations upon his 
Behaviour, 1744, 701, 702. 

Douglas, Heron and Co., The Precipitation and Fall of Messrs. Douglas, Heron 
and Company, late Bankers in Air, with the Ca^uses of their Distress and 
Ruin investigated and considered by a Committee of Inquiry appointed by the 
Proprietors, Edinburgh, 1778, 297. 

Douglass, Dr. William, A Summary, Historical and Political, of the First Plant- 
ing, Progressive Improvements and Present State of the British Settlements in 
North America, 1760, 23, 158, 310. 

Du Cange, Glossarium, 378, 885. 

Du Halde, J.-B., Description g^ographique, historique, chronologique, politique et 
physique de V empire de la Chine et de la Tartarie chinoise, 1735, 7^, 644. 

Du Pont de Nemours, P.-S-, Physiocratie, ou constitulion naturelle du gouverne- 
ment le plus avantageux cm genre humain, 1768, 629. 

Dupr6 de St. Maur, N,-F., Essai sur les Monnoies, ou riflexions sur le rapport 
entre Vargent et les denries, 1746, 180, 198, 240. 



INDEX II 973 

Recherches sur la udeur des Monnoies et sur les prix des grains avant et 

apris le concile de Francfortj 1762, 180. 

Du Tot, Rijlexions politiques sur les Finances et le Commerce^ ou Von examine 
qudles ont iti sur les reoenuSy les denrees^ le change stranger et consiquemment 
sur notre commerce^ les influences des augmentations et des diminutions des 
valeurs numeraires des monnoyes, 1754, 302, 864. 

Du Verney, J. Paris, Examen du livre intiUde ^Rejlexions politiqim sur les 
Finances et le Commerce^ 1740, 302, 864. 

Encyclopedic, 1755, S> 367* 

Expilly, Jean Joseph, Dictionnaire geographique, historique et politique des Gaules 
et de la France, 1768, 856. 

Fleetwood, William, Bishop of Ely, Chronicon Freciosum, 1707, 27, 34, 177, 178, 
182, 184, 232, 251, 252, 255. 

Folkes, Martin, Table of English Silver Coins, 1745, 26, 177, 251. 

Frewin, R., see Sims and Frewin. 

Fr6zier, Am6d^e-F., Voyage to the South Sea and along the Coasts of Chili and 
Peru in the years 1712, 1713 and 1714, with a Postscript by Dr. Edmund 
Halley, 1717, 169, 170, 204. 

Fuller, Dr. Thomas, History of the University of Cambridge, 1655, 34. 

Gee, Joshua, Trade and Navigation of Great Britain considered, 1729, 96. 

Gentleman^ s Magazine, Aug., 1764, 208. 

Gilbert, Sir Geoffrey, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Treatise of Tenures, 1757, 
368. 

Treatise on the Court of Exchequer, 1758, 831. 

Grotius, Dejure belli et pads, 1624, 23. 

Guicciardini, F., Della Jstoria dPtalia, 1738, 395. 

Gumilla, P. Jos6, Histoire naturelle civile et gtographique de VOrinoque, etc. 
trans. (from the Spanish) by M. Eidous, 1758, 530. 


Hale, Sir Matthew, Discourse touching Provision for the Poor, 1683, 77. 
Hansard, Parliamentary History, 199. 

Hanway, Jonas, Historical Account of the British Trade over the Caspian Sea, 
with a Journal of Travels from London through Russia into Persia, and back 
through Russia, Germany and Holland, 1753, 330. 

Harris, Joseph, Essay upon Money and Coins, 1757, 3, 12, 15, 23, 26, 27, 28, 


40, 4X, 44- 

Harte, Walter, Essays on Husbandry, 1764, 371. 

Hawkins, William, Treatise of the Pleas of the Crown, 1762, 613. 

Hay, William, Remarks on Laws relating to the Poor, 1735, 141. 

Hinault, C. J. F., Nouvd AbrSgd chromlogique de V histoire de France, 1768, 
394-S, s88, 7 S 7 - 

Herbert, C. J., Essai sur la police genirale des grains, sur leur pnx et sur les 
effetsdeV agriculture, 1755, 180, 198. 

Hobbes, Thomas, Leviathan, 1651, 31. 

Homer, Iliad, 23, 676, 730. ^ 

Odyssey, 730. 


Horsley, William, see Magens. 

Hume, David, Essays, Moral and Political, 1748, 15, 833. 

History of England, 1773, 26, 27, 77, 105, 132, 229, 374, 378, 380, 385, 386, 


3877 388, 389, 4 i 3 » 669, 743. 

Political Discourses, 1752, 30, 78, 309, 337, 385. 

Hutcheson, Francis, System of Moral Philosophy, 1755, 23. 

Hutchinson, Col., History of the Colony of MassachusetVs Bay, 1765, 893. 


James, R , see Ramazzini. 



974 INDEX II 

Juan, Don G., and Don Ant, UUoa, Voyage historique de VAmirique wiridionalef 
1752, 148, 169, 170, 186, 203, 204, 229, 534, 541, 543- 

Kalm, Peter, Travels into North America, containing its natural history and a 
circumstantial account of Us Plantations and Agriculture in general, etc,, 
1770, 223. 

Karnes, Henry Home, Lord, Sketches of the History of Man, 1774, 779, 802, 
833 j 851. 

Eling, Charles, British Merchant, 1721, 428, 512. 

King, Gregory, Natural and Political Observations and Conclusions upon the 
Stale and Condition of England, 1688, 196, 280. 

La Riviere, Mercier de, VOrdre nalurel et essentid des SocieUs politiques, 1767, 
264, 629, 643. 

Law, John, Money and Trade, Considered with a Proposal for Supplying the 
Nation with Money, 1705, 23, 28, 301, 302, 336. 

Livy, History, 656. 

Locke, John, Civil Government, 12, 399, 674. 

Some Considerations of the Consequences of the Lowering of Interest and 

Raising the Value of Money, 1696, Ivii, 23, 37, 336, 340, 399. 

Further Considerations Concerning Raising the Value of Money, 1695, 43. 

Lowndes, William, Report containing an Essay for the Amendment of the Silver 
Coins, 1695, 26, 194. 

Lucian, Eunuchus, 731. 

Machiavelli, Niccold, History of Florence, 771. 

Discourses on the First Decade of Titus Livius, 742. 

Madox, Thomas, Firma Burgi, 1720, 120, 123, 124, 374, 375, 376, 377. 

History and Antiquities of the Exchequer, 1711, 374. 

Magens, N,, Universal Merchant, ed. Horsley, 1753, 43, 91, 207, 208, 304, 454. 

Farther Explanations of subjects . . . contained in the Universal Merchant, 

1756, 208, 211. 

Mandeville, Bernard de, Fahle of the Bees, 1723, 3, 10, 12, 14, 102. 

Martin-Leake, Stephen, Historical Account of English Money, 1745, 23. 

INleggens, see Magens. 

Melon, J. F., Essai Politique sur le Commerce, 1761, 877, 879, 885. 

Mtmoires concernant les Droits, etc., see Beaumont, Moreau de. 

Messance, Recherches sur la poptdation des g^n^aliUs d^ Auvergne, de Lyon, de 
Rouen et de quelques provinces et villes du royaume, avec des reflexions sur la 
valeur du bled tant en France qvden Angleterre depuis 1674 jusquden 1764, 
1766, 84, 198, 240. 

Mirabeau,^ Viet. Riquetti, Marquis de, Philosophic rurale, ou economic ginerale 
et politique de V agriculture, pour servir de suite d V Ami des Hommes, 1766, 
644. 

Montesquieu, Esprit des Loix, 1748, 23, 96, 336, 348, 648, 729, 730, 808. 

Morellet, Abb6 Andr^, Examen de la rSponse de M. N** [Necker] au Mimoire de 
M, VAbbe Morellet, sur la Compagnie des Indes, 1769, 713. 

Mun, Thomas, England's Treasure by Forraign Trade, or the Ballance of our 
Forraign Trade is the Rule of our Treasure, 1664, 400, 401. 

Necker, Jacques, Sur la legislation et le commerce des Grains, 1775, 856. 

Newton, Sir Isaac, Representation to the Lords of the Treasury, 1717 (in Universed 
Merchant, see Magens), 207. 

Palladius, De re rustica, 153. 

Percy, Henry Algernon, the fifth Earl of Northumberland, The Regulations and 
Establishment of the Household of, at his castles of Wresill and Lekinfield in 
Yorkshire, begun anno domini MDXII., 1770, 179. 

Petty, Sir William, Political Arithmetic, 1699, 70. 



975 


INDEX II 

Verhum Sapienti^ 1691, 280. 

Pfeffel von Kriegelstein, C. F., Notcod Abrig^ chronologique de Vhistoire et du 
droi-puUique d^Alkmagne, 1776, 376, 378. 

Philosophical and Political History of the Establishment of the Europeans in the 
two Indies j see Raynal. 

Pinto, Isaac de, TraiU de la Circulation et du Cridit, 1771, 877. 

Plato y Euthydemus, 28. 

Republic, 729. 

Pliny, Natural History, 23, 24, 27, 39, 133, 219, 365, 649. 

Plutarch, Alexander, 133. 

Demosthenes, 133. 

Isocrates, 133. 

Solon, 730. 

Pococke, Dr. Richard, Bishop of Meath, Description of the East, 1743, 386. 

Poivre, Pierre, Voyages d^un Philosophe, on observations sur les mceurs et les arts 
des peuples de VAfrique, de VAsie, et de VAmirique, 176S, 156. 

Police of Grain, see Herbert. 

Polybius, History, 729, 732. 

Postlethwayt, James, History of the Public Revenue from 1688 to 1753, with an 
Appendix to 1758, 1759, 302, 303, 864, 86$, 866, 867, 868, 874. 

Postlethwayt, Malachi, Dictionary of Commerce, 1757, 91. 

Present State of Great Britain and North America with regard to Agriculture, 
Population, Trade and Manufactures, 1767, see America. 

Present State of the Nation, particularly with respect to its Trade, Finances, etc, 
(attributed to William Knox), 1768, 410, 411, 874. 

Price, Richard, Observations on Reversionary Payments, etc., 1771, 70. 

Provisions, A Report from the Committee who, upon the Sth day of February, 1764, 
were appointed to inquire into the Causes of the High Price of, with the Pro- 
ceedings of the House thereupon, 1764, 151, 152. 

Pufendorf, Dejure naturae et gentium, 23, 25, 28. 

Quesnay, Francois, (Euvres, ed. Oncken, 1888, 72, 367, 637, 645. 

Ralegh, Sir Walter, Works, ed. by Thos. Birch, 1751, 530. 

Ramazzini, Bernard, De morbis artificum diatriba, trans. by R. James, 1746, 82. 

Raynal, G. T. F., Histoire philosophique et politique des dablissemens et du com^ 
merce des EuropSens dans les deux Indes, Amsterdam ed., 1773, 203, 208, 
209, 366, 367, 478, 5^3, 536, 542, 555, 590- 

Reformateur, Le, 1756 827. 

Ruddiman, Thomas, An Introduction to Mr. James Anderson^ s Diplomata 
Scotiae, see Anderson, James. 

Rymer, Thomas, Foedera, 77. 

Sandi, Vettor, Principj di storia civile della Repubblica di Venezia, 1755, 381. 

Saxby, Henry, The British Customs, containing an Historical and Practical Ac- 
count of each branch of that part of the Revenue, 1757, 467, 468, 504, 608, 
621, 626, 826, 834, 

Seneca, De Ira, 554. 

Sims, W., and R. Frewin, Rates of Merchandise, 1782, 626. 

Smith, Adam, Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms, 1896, 5, 7, 8, 9, 
10, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 18, 21, 23, 28, 55, 62, 81, 95, ro2, 106, 121, 127, 150, 
164, 243, 259, 301, 302, 309, 320, 334, 336, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 
367, 368, 369, 370, 371, 372, 373, 376, 379, 386, 388, 399, 410, 454, 460, 
464, 554, 648, 653, 655, 667, 668, 669, 672, 674, 679, 764, 822, 877. 

Smith, Charles, Three Tracts on the Corn Trade and Corn Laws, 1766, 192, 194, 
199, 256, 428, 473, 475 , 501, 503, 504, 506. ^ 

Smith, John, Chronicon Rusticum-Commerciale, or Memoirs of Wool, 1747, 25, 
231, 234, 428, 616. 

Solorzano-Pereira, De Indiarum Jure, 1777, 201. 



INDEX II 


976 

Steuart, Sir James, Inquiry into the Principles of Political Economy ^ 1767, 208. 
Strype, John, Life of the learned Sir Thomas Smithy 1698, 34. 

Swift, Dr. Jonathan, Answer to a Paper Called a Memorid of the Poor Inhabi- 
tants, Tradesmen and Labourers of the Kingdom of Ireland, 832. 

Tavernier, John Baptista, Six Voyages through Turkey into Persia and the East 
Indies, 1678, 173. 

Theocritus, Idylls, loi. 

Thucydides, History, 655, 656. 

Tracts upon the Corn Trade, see Smith, Charles. 

Treaties of Peace, Alliance and Commerce between Great Britain and other Powers 
from the Revolution in 1688 to the Present Time, 1772, 512. 

Tyrrell, James, General History of England both Ecclesiastical and Civil, 1700, 

675* 

UUoa, Voyage historique de VAmirique rnSridionale, see Juan. 

Uztariz, J6r6me, Theory and Practice of Commerce and Maritime Ajfairs, trans. 
by John Kippax, 1751, 204, 851. 

Varro, De re rustica, 153, 224. 

Virgil, Georgies, 173-4, 556. 

Voltaire, Sikle de Louis XIV., 454, 763. 

Xenophon, Anabasis, 559. 

Hdlenica, 415. 

